

--- PAGE 1 ---
American Economic Review 2021, 111(7): 2275–2308 
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20200412
2275
Security Transitions†
By Thiemo Fetzer, Pedro C. L. Souza, Oliver Vanden Eynde,  
and Austin L. Wright*
How do foreign powers disengage from a conflict? We study this 
issue by examining the recent, ­large-scale security transition from 
international troops to local forces in the ongoing civil conflict in 
Afghanistan. We construct a new dataset that combines information 
on this transition process with declassified conflict outcomes and 
previously unreleased quarterly survey data of residents’ percep-
tions of local security. Our empirical design leverages the staggered 
­roll-out of the transition, and employs a novel instrumental variables 
approach to estimate the impact. We find a significant, sharp, and 
timely decline of insurgent violence in the initial phase: the secu-
rity transfer to Afghan forces. We find that this is followed by a sig-
nificant surge in violence in the second phase: the actual physical 
withdrawal of foreign troops. We argue that this pattern is consistent 
with a signaling model, in which the insurgents reduce violence stra-
tegically to facilitate the foreign military withdrawal to capitalize on 
the reduced foreign military presence afterward. Our findings clarify 
the destabilizing consequences of withdrawal in one of the costliest 
conflicts in modern history, and yield potentially actionable insights 
for designing future security transitions. (JEL D74, F51, F52, O17)
Foreign military occupations typically end with a security transition, in which 
international forces transfer military and police powers to local allies. Such 
­foreign-to-local security transitions are difficult to manage (Lake 2016). This is due 
to the likely survival, in one form or another, of ­anti-government elements that trig-
gered the foreign military intervention. The matter of who gains or loses power at 
the end of the eventual security transition may have significant short- and ­long-run 
*Fetzer: Department of Economics, University of Warwick (email: t.fetzer@warwick.ac.uk); Souza: School of 
Economics and Finance, Queen Mary University of London (email: p.souza@qmul.ac.uk); Vanden Eynde: Paris 
School of Economics and CNRS (email: o.vandeneynde@psemail.eu); Wright: Harris School of Public Policy, 
University of Chicago (email: austinlw@uchicago.edu). Stefano DellaVigna was the coeditor for this article. We 
thank Gani Aldashev, Leonardo Arriola, Eli Berman, Ethan Bueno de Mesquita, Nathan J. Canen, Wioletta Dziuda, 
James Fearon, Anthony Fowler, Massimo Morelli, Hannes Mueller, Gerard Padro, Christopher Price, Jacob Shapiro, 
Mathias Thoenig, Juan Vargas, Daniel Weggeland (SIGAR) and audiences at the Chicago Harris Political Economy, 
ESOC Annual Conference, University of Warwick, IAE Barcelona Workshop on Prediction for Prevention, HiCN 
conference, CREST Political Economy Workshop, Labex OSE Aussois Days, Durham University, University of 
Manchester, Toulouse School of Economics, UZH, APSA, and NBER. Manh Duc Nguyen provided excellent 
research assistance. Support from the Pearson Institute for the Study and Resolution of Conflicts, ANR grant 
COOPCONFLICT, and EUR grant ANR-17-EURE-0001 is gratefully acknowledged. We thank Phil Eles, ANQAR 
technical lead at NATO, for granting access to the platform and providing technical feedback. Any errors remain 
our own.
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20200412 to visit the article page for additional materials and author  
disclosure statements.


--- PAGE 2 ---
2276
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JULY 2021
­consequences for economic and political development. Yet, surprisingly little is 
known about the conflict dynamics of countries experiencing a ­foreign-to-local 
security transition. Our research addresses this issue by conducting a microlevel 
study of the impact of the ­large-scale security transition that marked the end of 
Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan, the ­long-running military campaign 
of the North American Treaty Organization (NATO).
Since 1960, at least 115 foreign military occupations have ended (­Collard-Wexler 
2013) (see online Appendix Figure A1). A substantial percentage of these inter-
ventions involved a security transition with the withdrawal of troops and redeploy-
ment of weaponry to local allies. With a large number of military occupations active 
around the world, security transitions are an important economic and policy issue. 
Even though the historical record is riddled with security transitions, nearly all 
microlevel empirical research on counterinsurgency focuses on understanding the 
economic and political drivers that explain how military interventions begin, and 
how conflict strategies and war fighting tactics evolve during an ongoing campaign 
(Berman and Matanock 2015). By contrast, the security transitions that mark the 
end of foreign military occupations have received less attention. Empirical work 
on this topic has naturally been constrained by the lack of consistent conflict data 
during the transition period, particularly for unsuccessful transitions. Our paper 
overcomes this ­long-standing constraint by leveraging unique, rich microlevel 
data collected continuously during the transition process in Afghanistan; these 
data enable us to address the knowledge gap around exit strategies after foreign  
interventions.
Conflict patterns during and after the security transitions that mark the end 
of a foreign intervention or occupation are theoretically ambiguous. A security 
transition may shift provision of policing and formal military operations from 
­well-trained and equipped foreign fighters to unseasoned, local forces armed with 
outdated technologies, or equipment with which they are unfamiliar. Even if local 
fighters are capable, they may lack legitimacy, inflict unintended harm on civilians, 
or deliberately discriminate against ethnic rivals: undermining economic welfare 
and damaging public confidence in the quality and stability of ­host-nation insti-
tutions. Local forces might also transfer weaponry and other war fighting capital 
to unregulated paramilitary groups (Dube and Naidu 2015). Under these condi-
tions, insurgents are likely to increase their operations, and they may consolidate 
their control over previously contested areas. Furthermore, insurgents may directly 
and strategically respond to plans of foreign forces to withdraw troops by chang-
ing their underlying tactics and targets (Bueno de Mesquita 2013, Wright 2016, 
Vanden Eynde 2018). Security transitions may be poorly coordinated between for-
eign and local forces, leading to political and tactical disorder, and further enhanc-
ing tensions. On the other hand, local forces might be better able to integrate with 
communities and to extract information from ­noncombatants about insurgent oper-
ations (Lyall, Shiraito, and Imai 2015). Local forces may have greater knowledge 
than foreign soldiers about the human terrain and difficulties motivating violence 
against conationals or coethnics; this understanding could lead to reduced insur-
gent activity and increased counterinsurgent effectiveness. Importantly, there is no 
existing empirical evidence on the relative significance of these different mecha-
nisms in the context of security transitions.


--- PAGE 3 ---
2277
FETZER ET AL.: SECURITY TRANSITIONS
VOL. 111 NO. 7
To study how security transitions from foreign to local forces influence insur-
gent  activity and counterinsurgent effectiveness, we examine the ­large-scale 
­transfer of policing and military power from the International Security Assistance 
Force (ISAF) to host nation forces in Afghanistan at the end of Operation Enduring 
Freedom. In 2001, international forces displaced the incumbent regime, and assisted 
in the installation of an ostensibly democratic government. During the occupation 
foreign forces, coordinated under the auspices of NATO, helped train and equip 
local police and military forces. Planning for the transition of security provision 
from ISAF to Afghan forces began as early as 2010, and was formally announced in 
2011. The transition was staggered, and coordinated around administrative districts. 
Over three years, and five transition tranches, Afghanistan’s districts were trans-
ferred from ISAF to Afghan control.
We estimate the impact of the security transition on conflict dynamics using 
­exceptionally granular data, which allow us to overcome a core constraint that has 
hampered quantitative studies of security transitions so far. Since the start of major 
ISAF operations, a system to collect comprehensive conflict data from ISAF and 
­host-nation forces was set up to track significant activities (SIGACTS). These geo-
tagged and ­time-stamped event data document dozens of different types of insur-
gent and security force operations: representing the most complete catalog of conflict 
activity during Operation Enduring Freedom currently available (Shaver and Wright 
2016). We secured access to these data through formal declassification channels. 
We then combined these observational data with microlevel survey data collected 
by NATO (using local contractors) through the Afghanistan National Quarterly 
Assessment Research (ANQAR) platform. We obtained restricted access to the 
complete survey records of around 370,000 individual respondents across dozens 
of quarterly waves from 2008 to 2016. These surveys include questions measuring 
perceptions of security conditions, the extent of local security provision, and percep-
tions of territorial control. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first conflict where 
detailed combat records and high frequency survey data can be combined to study 
a security transition from foreign to local forces. Using these data in tandem allows 
us to ­cross-validate our findings and to distinguish between potential mechanisms.1
Our empirical analysis sheds light on the two main phases of the security transition. 
The first phase is the onset of the transition, marked by a sequence of public announce-
ments detailing where and when security responsibility is to be handed over to local 
forces. The second phase is the actual physical withdrawal and closure of military bases 
hosting NATO troops. To estimate the effect of the onset of the security transition, we 
use a ­difference-in-differences approach. We exploit the ­staggered schedule of transi-
tion announcements that occurred across five tranches. This allows us to pool evidence 
from each of the tranches to study the onset and aftermath of the security transition 
on conflict outcomes by comparing localities where the Afghan National Security 
Forces (ANSF) took over security to those where ISAF was still in charge. We exam-
ine security levels in districts before and after the security transfer. The geographic 
precision of our conflict data enables us to employ a ­high-resolution, ­spatial-matching 
1 Existing work rarely combines observational and survey data on conflicts; Gould and Klor (2010) and 
Jaeger et al. (2015) are notable exceptions. Studying both observational data on conflict events and survey data on 
security perceptions side by side, we find consistent patterns across both types of data.


--- PAGE 4 ---
2278
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JULY 2021
design as an ­alternative to our ­district-level ­analysis. Our results for this first transfer 
phase show that the local announcement of the security transition schedule led to a 
­short-term decline in local violence. This pattern holds both for conflict measures 
that are drawn from the SIGACTS database as well for those that are taken from 
ANQAR survey instruments measuring the security perceptions of the local popu-
lation. This improvement in security outcomes appears to have gone hand in hand 
with a substantial upward shift in civilian perceptions of the efficacy of local security  
forces.
Our second empirical exercise focuses on the physical withdrawal of NATO 
troops. Using a newly constructed dataset of individual base closures and hando-
vers, we employ an instrumental variables strategy, exploiting operational and logis-
tical constraints of the troop withdrawal. Specifically, we exploit ­cross-sectional 
variation in the travel distance between individual districts and the ten major logis-
tical hubs that had the ­military-grade airports required to accommodate the cargo 
airplanes that transported arms and troops out of the country. This approach helps 
us to address concerns about the endogeneity of the sequencing of base closures 
across different regions. We address potential violations of the exclusion restric-
tion directly by accounting for the correlation between logistical constraints and 
other measures of population and market proximity. Our findings for this second 
phase show that violence significantly surged, and residents’ perceptions of secu-
rity plummeted after the departure of international forces. Overall, the pattern that 
emerges suggests that the security handover is associated with an improvement in 
the security situation, while the physical withdrawal of NATO troops is marked by 
a dramatic worsening of security.
This pattern is consistent across observational military records of combat activity 
and civilian sentiment, and it is robust to a number of alternative model specifica-
tions. We pay particular attention to violations of the ­non-interference assumption 
inherent in designs in which spatial spillovers or displacement effects are possi-
ble. Rather than invoking conventional spatial models that require the researcher to 
­prespecify the extent to which conflict processes interact across space, we leverage 
the work by de Paula, Rasul, and Souza (2020). We adapt their approach to the 
specific issue at hand: learning the pattern of spatial spillovers of conflict, and then 
using that information to directly control for the spillovers.
We investigate two plausible mechanisms empirically: withdrawal of foreign tar-
gets, and tactical complementarities. A reduced foreign troop presence and tran-
sition to local forces could have weakened Taliban mobilization due to a change 
in target type. While consistent with violence reductions after the first phase, this 
mechanism cannot explain the subsequent increase in Taliban attacks after with-
drawal. The subsequent increase in violence is also inconsistent with the possibility 
that foreign troops were no longer needed to maintain stability, or the possibility that 
local forces were adequately prepared to operate independently. On the other hand, 
the combination of local operational command and indirect ISAF support could 
have produced significant security gains that were then reversed with the physical 
withdrawal of foreign troops; a range of empirical tests, however, shows no evidence 
of such complementarities between ISAF and the ANSF.
Instead, we argue that the main results are consistent with a third mechanism: 
“lying low.” That is, insurgents strategically and temporarily draw down their 


--- PAGE 5 ---
2279
FETZER ET AL.: SECURITY TRANSITIONS
VOL. 111 NO. 7
forces, in effect lying low until after counterinsurgents have sufficiently raised the 
cost of local ­re-intervention. While our primary contribution is to provide a first 
empirical record of an important security transition, we use a simple model to sit-
uate the observed patterns. NATO cannot directly observe the local capacity of the 
Taliban relative to the ANSF; thus, NATO bases its decision to physically withdraw 
troops on observed levels of violence during the transition period. A ­high-capacity 
Taliban can then decide to pursue a strategy of lying low as part of a pooling equi-
librium, which facilitates the withdrawal of ISAF, and increases the ability of the 
Taliban to inflict violence when the transition is completed.
We contribute to several strands of literature in economics and political science. 
Prior work in economics has investigated the causes of civil conflict (Fearon and 
Laitin 2003, Collier and Hoeffler 2004, Bazzi and Blattman 2014, Berman et al. 
2017, Limodio 2019, Manacorda and Tesei 2020), and examined development inter-
ventions that occur during ongoing insurgencies (Berman, Shapiro, and Felter 2011; 
Fetzer 2020; Beath et  al. 2013; Crost, Felter, and Johnston 2014; Sexton 2016). 
Seminal theoretical work has highlighted the role of state capacity in shaping con-
flict dynamics, including the end of war (Wittman 1979; Werner 1999; Besley and 
Persson 2010; Padró i Miquel and Yared 2012; Powell 2013; Gennaioli and Voth 
2015; Esteban, Morelli, and Rohner 2015). Other studies have focused on war fight-
ing directly, exploring the effectiveness of various government tactics (Lyall 2009, 
Dell and Querubin 2018) and the use of violence by insurgents (König et al. 2017, 
Condra et al. 2018, Fetzer et al. 2021a). We advance this literature with the first explo-
ration of conflict dynamics during a ­large-scale, ­foreign-to-local security transition.
Our study also yields potentially actionable insights regarding one of the cost-
liest conflicts in modern history. Since 2001, the United States alone has invested 
$1.07 trillion in combat operations, economic assistance, and soldier healthcare: 
all directly related to the war in Afghanistan. The human toll of the war was also 
substantial; by 2018, ISAF had lost 3,547 soldiers in combat operations, and at least 
31,000 civilian deaths had also been documented. The security transition marked a 
turning point in the conflict, and it has been the subject of fierce political debates 
at all its stages: when it was announced, when it was implemented, and after it 
had been completed. The evidence we present demonstrates how the withdrawal 
of foreign forces influenced the stability of local political actors and institutions. It 
suggests how future transitions, including other NATO troop drawdowns, might be 
managed more effectively: addressing a significant gap in our understanding of a 
topic of immense economic and policy significance. More broadly, this study rein-
forces the importance of data collection and dissemination during and after armed 
conflict. Rigorously evaluating government interventions, especially force transi-
tions, requires careful, ongoing measurement of local conditions and a commitment 
to making data, like the combat and survey records we study here, available for 
research.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section I provides background context on the 
security transition in Afghanistan, and describes the data used in this investigation. 
Section II reviews the empirical strategies we employ. Section III presents the main 
results. Section IV discusses the mechanisms that could explain our findings, pro-
viding a simple conceptual framework as well as discussing the external validity. 
Section V concludes.


--- PAGE 6 ---
2280
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JULY 2021
I.  Context and Data
A. Timing of the Security Transition
The war in Afghanistan led a large number of NATO countries to participate in 
ground operations under the umbrella of ISAF. According to United Nations Security 
Council Resolution 1386, ISAF’s role was explicitly to assist the Afghan Interim 
Authority in rebuilding government institutions and providing security. From its 
inception, the mission was conceived as a temporary intervention. First steps toward 
a security transition were taken in November 2009, when ­then-President Hamid 
Karzai announced the desire to see a complete transition by the end of 2014. The 
United States subsequently announced that the transition process would begin in 
2011. In July 2010, the Joint ­Afghan-NATO Inteqal Board (JANIB) was established 
to implement the transition process. JANIB selected a first tranche of districts for 
which the ANSF took over security, and President Karzai announced these districts 
in March 2011. The process was completed in five tranches, with an official tran-
sition ceremony to mark the completion of the transfer at the end of 2014 (NATO 
2014a). These events are depicted on a timeline in Figure 1. The official transfer of 
security responsibility is the first phase of the broader transition process, with ISAF 
base closures and the ultimate physical withdrawal of ISAF troops as the second 
phase. The next subsections discuss these two transition phases in detail.
B. Security Transfer: Assignment to Transition Tranches
In November 2010, JANIB convened for the first time. Under the leadership of 
Dr. Ashraf Ghani (appointed by President Karzai as the Chairman of the Afghan 
Transition Coordination Commission) and ­co-chaired by ISAF Commander General 
David Petraeus and NATO representatives, the JANIB confirmed the ­2011–2014 
transition timeline. It emphasized stability and ­self-sufficiency as goals of transition. 
In February 2011, JANIB recommended the geographic areas assessed as prepared 
to begin the transition process. Authorization to proceed from Stabilization into 
Transition was decided by JANIB based on the following factors:2
	
(i)	 The capability of the ANSF to shoulder additional security tasks with less 
assistance from ISAF;
	 (ii)	 The level of security in the area, and the degree to which the local populace 
was able to pursue routine daily activities;
	 (iii)	 The development of local governance structures, so that security would not 
be undermined as ISAF assistance diminished;
	 (iv)	 The ability of ISAF to adjust its force levels and posture as the Afghan forces 
expanded their capabilities, and as threats to security were reduced.
2 See “Report on Progress toward Security and Stability in Afghanistan,” Department of Defense, April 2011, 
https://bit.ly/37p8eKT.


--- PAGE 7 ---
2281
FETZER ET AL.: SECURITY TRANSITIONS
VOL. 111 NO. 7
Although these criteria suggest a ­rules-based approach, the actual assessments 
and recommendations of the JANIB board were not made public, and they remain 
classified. The final decision on the assignment to transition tranches was taken by 
the Afghan cabinet, where political considerations played an important role, too. For 
example, President Karzai is reported to have aimed at an ethnically and regionally 
balanced first tranche, resulting in the inclusion of districts in the first tranche that 
were not recommended. It was noted in 2012, that while NATO provided thorough 
security assessments “ultimately, the transfer decision lies with President Hamid 
Karzai and his principal advisor for transition, Ashraf Ghani. Complex political 
considerations, including ethnic balancing, at times influence the transfer deci-
sions, despite ISAF’s advice.” 3 Concerns over whether the JANIB board stuck to 
the initial aspiration set out in the Lisbon NATO summit of a ­conditions-based, 
not ­calendar-driven, process are highly questionable. As the process continued, 
the assignment of districts to different transition tranches became more and more 
opaque.4 While the allocation of districts to transition tranches was subject to dis-
cretion, NATO’s commitment to five tranches between 2011 and 2014 imposed con-
straints on the timing of the security transfers. The districts and their assignments 
to the ultimate transition tranches are presented in panel B of Figure 2.5 Our vari-
ous ­difference-in-differences strategies exploit the temporal variation generated by 
the transition process. Section II provides details of these strategies, and presents 
­event-study evidence and ­pretreatment effects to address concerns about endogene-
ity in the tranche assignments.
3 See Vanda Felbab-Brown, “Afghanistan Field Trip Report VII,” Brookings Institution, https://brook.
gs/3fSKhiT.
4 See Thomas Ruttig, “Opaque and Dilemma-Ridden: A Look Back at Transition,” Afghan Analysts Network, 
August 12, 2013, https://bit.ly/37pjMxs.
5 We exclude Nimroz and Daykundi because they did not have a Provincial Reconstruction Team, and did not 
experience a security transition. We also exclude Mihtarlam district, as different parts of the district were transi-
tioned at different points in time. Results are robust to not dropping these data.
Figure 1. Key Dates in the Transition Process
Notes: Dates of the different transition stages were obtained from the NATO publication Inteqal: Transition to 
Afghan Lead. The authors complemented the graphical timeline with auxiliary information.
President Karzai aims for complete 
transition by the end of 2014
Kabul Conference: JANIB established to 
implement transition
NATO Lisbon Summit: confirmation of 
the end of  2014 deadline
Afghan New Year: Karzai announces set
of districts in the first transition tranche
Karzai announces second tranche
Karzai announces third tranche
Karzai announces fourth tranche
Karzai announces fifth tranche
Transition ceremony: end
of ISAF involvement
US announces start of transition in 2011
Nov
2009
Jul
2010
June
2013
Nov
2010
Nov
2011
Mar
2011
May
2012
Dec
2012
Dec
2014


--- PAGE 8 ---
2282
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JULY 2021
It is important to highlight that the security transfers marked a real shift in respon-
sibility, but did not represent a complete break. While ISAF troops were transferred 
out of lead combat roles, the coalition maintained a supporting and advisory role 
even after the transition. These trends are evident in Figure 3. This figure plots the 
share of recorded events in the SIGACTS conflict dataset (described in Section IE) 
that involved coalition and/or Afghan security forces together. Prior to the transition 
Figure 2. Distribution of Conflict Intensity and Assignment of Districts to Different Tranches of the 
Security Transfer to the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF)
Notes: Panel A presents the distribution of conflict events in the SIGACTS data across the country. Panel B presents 
the different assignments of districts to the five different transition tranches.
400 km
0
400 km
0
Transition tranches
   Tranche 1
   Tranche 2
Tranche 3
Tranche 4
Tranche 5
Panel A. Confict intensity
Panel B. Assignment of districts to tranches
Figure 3. Share of SIGACTS Events Involving Security Forces
Notes: The figure plots the share of events per quarter by security force involvement. This measure is based on all 
events (including ­noncombat activities). Afghan security forces (ANSF) include all armed forces, including local 
and border police. Vertical lines indicate the quarter of the first and the last transition tranches.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Share of events
2008:III
2010:I
2011:III
2013:I
2014:III
Quarter identifer
Joint events ANSF and ISAF
ISAF only
ANSF only


--- PAGE 9 ---
2283
FETZER ET AL.: SECURITY TRANSITIONS
VOL. 111 NO. 7
onset, as ISAF was preparing Afghan forces for the handover of security responsi-
bility, joint operations increased. This increase reflects the fact that Afghan forces 
were deployed to the field. Toward the end of the transition, Afghan forces absorbed 
the vast majority of all operations on their own. The transition announcement thus 
marks the gradual handover of security responsibility to local forces, which typi-
cally took between 3 and 12 months to complete, during which NATO gradually 
shifted into an oversight and supporting role otherwise known as overwatch. The 
date of the announcement of a tranche and the naming of districts that would partic-
ipate in each wave was public information. We consider these security transfers the 
first phase of the transition process. The second phase of the transition was the for-
mal withdrawal of troops and the closure of ISAF installations, which we describe 
in the next subsection.
C. Base Closures
Over the course of ISAF’s engagement, up to 140,000 NATO troops operated out 
of an estimated 825 physical bases scattered across Afghanistan. The withdrawal 
of most NATO forces led to the closure, demolition, or handing over to Afghan 
Security Forces of nearly 800 of these bases. The vast majority of these bases were 
small, tactical positions, such as Observation Posts or check points that were host-
ing, at most, small troop consignments (SIGAR 2016). Only a handful of bases still 
remain in NATO operation under ISAF’s ­small-scale, ­follow-up mission, Resolute 
Support, which officially began on January 1, 2015, and currently involves around 
12,000 troops.
We faced a major challenge in collecting data on ­base-level deployments from 
more than 51 ­troop-sending countries; thus, we identified an alternative and robust 
method for measuring and coding base closures. We relied on a set of military facil-
ities regularly mentioned in the US Department of Defense Periodic Occupational 
and Environmental Monitoring Summary (POEMS), which provides information 
about the physical environment and environmental hazards of main bases and 
smaller bases out of which NATO troops operated.6 The POEMS does not provide 
exact location information or the exact date when bases ceased to be used for oper-
ations. However, we used the list of 338 main base locations, and we conducted a 
systematic search of sources and references for each base (Fetzer et al. 2021b). We 
searched video and ­image-hosting platforms for ­time-stamped video and images 
shared on social media by many soldiers on deployment. In addition, we conducted 
systematic searches of main news sources using the LexisNexis and Factiva news 
databases, along with standard ­search-engine queries. For most bases we have sev-
eral name variations as bases were sometimes named after fallen soldiers and our 
list also includes a substantial number of bases that were not exclusively under US 
command.
We were able to identify the district in which a subset of bases (170 of the 338 
main bases) are located, and we were able to note when the base was closed, handed 
6 We restrict ourselves to the likely set of larger bases, such as forward operating bases, camps, combat outposts, 
and bases hosting the provincial reconstruction teams (PRTs). There is no clear size ranking. The PRTs are partic-
ularly important as most were operated by multinational forces.


--- PAGE 10 ---
2284
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JULY 2021
over to the Afghan Security Forces, or “retrograded” or demolished. It is likely that 
our sample is biased toward including bases that were not physically demolished 
but were handed over to the ANSF. We cannot confirm whether a base that was 
handed over to the ANSF was subsequently used by Afghan forces. Given the lack 
of spatial accuracy and the potential measurement error, we aggregate the informa-
tion to the district level, computing the date that the last base was either retrograded 
or handed over in a district. Lastly, we also obtained data on the public handover 
ceremonies that were usually held at the end of the formal withdrawal process in 
the provincial capitals. Since our base closure data do not provide us with a date 
for all districts in a province, we infer the physical withdrawal date based on these 
handover ceremonies.
Base transitions and withdrawals tend to happen after the formal transfer of secu-
rity responsibility (i.e., after the first phase of the transition). Panel A of Figure 4 
presents the timing of the transition tranche announcement relative to the recorded 
transition ceremony or base closure in months. The pattern that emerges is quite 
evident: relative to the transition onset date, base closures and handovers were hap-
pening earlier in remote areas than in geographic centers. We argue that this pattern 
is a consequence of the logistic organization of the withdrawal process, not a coinci-
dence or artifact of dataset construction. A host of compelling anecdotal documen-
tation provides further support to this view, which we discuss below.
D. Exploiting Logistic Constraints as an Instrument for the Timing  
of Base Closures
The physical withdrawal of ISAF troops and material was a significant logistical 
challenge. Withdrawal was impeded by several factors. We exploit these factors to 
inform the construction of an instrumental variable to isolate ­as-if random variation 
in the sequencing of the physical closure of ISAF bases. First, the closest accessible 
sea port was Karachi, Pakistan, requiring transit through the Khyber Pass. This route 
was shut down during the early phase of the transition (2011, 2012) after an airstrike 
accidentally killed Pakistani troops. Second, convoys using the ­land-based route 
through Uzbekistan’s Salang Pass were restricted from carrying weapons. Third, 
­land-based consolidation of heavy machinery was restricted by poor road infra-
structure in Afghanistan. Fourth, restrictions on equipment handover created a sub-
stantial burden: the United States alone had $36 billion worth of heavy equipment, 
armaments, and sensitive resources that needed to be relocated. Together, ISAF 
forces needed to move more than 70,000 vehicles and 120,000 industrial shipping 
containers (Van Loven 2013).
To address these challenges, ISAF used ­heavy-duty, ­long-haul ­C-17 Globemaster 
planes to transport equipment from Afghanistan to Kuwait. The size of these air-
craft implied that only a few airports could be used as retrograde hubs. These nodal 
bases informed both the timing and geographic sequencing of the pullout. Smaller 
or remote bases were handed over first, with materials consolidated around larger 
bases with transport capabilities. Forward Operating Base (FOB) Torkham in 
Momand Dara district of Nangarhar province offers an illustrative example. The 
base was formally handed over to the ANSF on December 18, 2013. FOB Torkham 
was located on the border with Pakistan. Despite the relative proximity of a transit 


--- PAGE 11 ---
2285
FETZER ET AL.: SECURITY TRANSITIONS
VOL. 111 NO. 7
point to leave Afghanistan, most of the equipment from FOB Torkham was sent 
73 km inland to Jalalabad Airfield by road and using ­sling-loaded ­CH-53 helicop-
ters. From there, materials were transferred an additional 185 kilometers to the 
Bagram north of Kabul. From there, materials were flown out to Kuwait using ­C-17 
Globemaster airplanes.7
The discussion above suggests that access to a small subset of bases was crucial 
up until the last stages of the military pullout. As a consequence, bases were closed 
from the outside in, consecutively starting with the outlying bases with difficult or 
limited access to these central transport hubs. We use this information, together 
with information on the available road network (AIMS 2013), to construct a vari-
able capturing the travel distance on the ­least-cost path to one of the ten logistical 
hubs (AIMS 2000, Fetzer 2021b). The resulting instrument is presented in panel B 
of Figure 4. We show that our results are robust to controlling for a host of other 
distance measures, most importantly, the distance to the nearest airport of any type 
(i.e., including airfields not suited for heavy cargo planes).
7 See C. Todd Lopez, “Reliable Tempo Draws Down 13-Year Combat Footprint in Afghanistan,” Military News, 
April 17, 2015, https://bit.ly/33vw7iH.
Figure 4. Timing of Base Closure Relative to District Tranche Announcement  
and Travel Distance to Nearest Retrograde Logistic Hub
Notes: Panel A visually presents the variation in the timing of the base closure (“Troop withdrawal”) dates relative 
to the transition onset announcements (“security handover”). If a district is matched with several bases, the timing 
is determined by the date of the last recorded base that was retrograded or handed over. Panel B presents visually 
the ­least-cost, shortest path distance between a district centroid to one of the 10 retrograde logistic hubs used in 
the withdrawal operation. We assume a unit cost of crossing via paved roads; the cost of crossing via an unpaved 
road occurs two units of costs per unit of distance, while crossing terrain without roads incurs a cost of 10 units. 
­Least-cost paths are computed used Dijkstra’s algorithm.
Base handover relative to tranche announcement
  <0 months
  6 months
  6–12 months
12–18 months
18–24 months 
24–30 months
30–36 months
>36 months
Travel distance to logistics hub
0.259–0.324
0.324–0.49
0.017–0.076
0.076–0.104
0.104–0.136
0.136–0.165
0.165–0.206
0.206–0.259
Panel A. Last base closure date relative
to tranche date
Panel B. Distance to nearest logistic hub
0
km
400
0
km
400


--- PAGE 12 ---
2286
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JULY 2021
E. Measuring Conflict Activity and Perceptions
We rely on two novel microlevel data sources that allow us to combine results 
from institutionally tracked conflict data with detailed survey data.
Significant Activities Event Data.—Afghanistan provides a rich environment for 
investigating security transitions, and as we describe below, our study overcomes 
several critical obstacles that usually limit the ability to draw meaningful and robust 
inferences. We rely on newly declassified microdata collected by ISAF and local 
national security partners secured by Shaver and Wright (2016). Throughout the 
ongoing conflict, these security forces have tracked insurgent attacks by document-
ing the approximate time and precise location of attacks perpetrated against them or 
reported to them. This dataset includes more than 200,000 individual observations 
of insurgent attacks between 2008 and 2014, each of which is identified by attack 
type (e.g., attack by direct fire, attack via the use of improvised explosive devices 
(IEDs)(Shaver and Wright n.d.)).
Afghan insurgents undertook several primary types of attacks throughout the 
war. These involved attacks from direct fire, IEDs, and other combat activity. Direct 
fire includes attacks perpetrated at close range (direct ­line-of-sight encounters). 
Individual insurgents (often acting in groups) carry out these attacks in a variety 
of ways. IEDs tend to be directed against moving targets (e.g., vehicle patrols and 
convoys); IEDs are typically placed on or immediately around roadways. Our data 
also track indirect fire combat events. Indirect fire refers to attacks that include mor-
tars and rockets, which can be launched from much greater distances, but tend to 
be far less accurate. Nevertheless, even when mortars and rockets fail to strike their 
intended target, they often create loud explosions that can be heard over relatively 
large distances.
Afghanistan Nationwide Quarterly Assessment Research Survey Data.—Our sur-
vey evidence relies on the Afghanistan Nationwide Quarterly Assessment Research 
(ANQAR) platform (NATO n.d.). ANQAR tracks civilian attitudes toward govern-
ment, ­anti-government entities, and coalition partners. Survey responses are col-
lected on a quarterly basis by local contractors. Before administering a survey wave, 
local elders are contacted to secure permission for enumerators to enter villages. 
When enumerators could not access sampled villages, intercept interviews were 
used to collect information from residents traveling in neighboring areas (Child 
2016). Questions vary by survey wave, but the questions most relevant to our inves-
tigation are consistently included. Although early waves have higher nonresponse 
rates than later waves, these rates are consistently lower (­5–10 percent) than those 
of comparable national surveys conducted in the United States and Europe (Condra 
and Wright 2019). We have restricted access to data from 2008 to 2016, cover-
ing roughly 370,000 respondents, through a ­data-sharing agreement with NATO. 
Summary statistics of the data are presented in online Appendix Table A1.
Other Data Sources Used.—We rely on digital placemats from ISAF archives 
to link districts to regional commands, and we classify districts using a standard-
ized administrative map compiled by the Empirical Studies of Conflict (ESOC) 


--- PAGE 13 ---
2287
FETZER ET AL.: SECURITY TRANSITIONS
VOL. 111 NO. 7
research group (Weidmann 2010, NATO 2014b, United States Army 2011). All 
events and survey waves are rectified to match this map. We incorporate information 
from the Afghan Commander’s Emergency Response Program (CERP), which is a 
­military-led scheme for ­small-scale development projects (Walker n.d.). These data 
were obtained through formal channels; these data cover new projects initiated until 
the beginning of 2014, and they include projects that were active during 2014 and 
beyond. In addition, our empirical analysis includes detailed ­land-cover data (Friedl 
and Sulla-Menashe 2019, Hsu et al. 2015), ­grid-cell population data (WorldPop 
2013), and measures of elevation and terrain features (EROS 2017) that we exploit 
in our empirical designs.
II.  Empirical Strategy
Our paper studies the impact of the two main phases of the security transition: 
(i) the transfer of control from ISAF to the ANSF, and (ii) the physical withdrawal 
of ISAF troops. We rely on different strategies to estimate these effects, which we 
detail in this section. Lastly, we discuss in detail how we leverage new methods from 
spatial econometrics to flexibly control for conflict displacement.
A. Security Transfer to ANSF
Our baseline empirical strategy is a ­difference-in-differences approach, compar-
ing districts in which the security transition has been implemented to ­nontreated 
districts, before and after the transition:
(1)	
​y​d, r, t​  =  ​α​d​ + ​β​r, t​ + γ × ​Handover​d, t​ + ​η​d​ × t + ​ϵ​d, r, t​​.
In the equation above, ​d​ indicates the district, ​r​ the Regional Command (RC) and ​t​ 
the quarter. Note, ​​Handover​d, t​​ switches on when ANSF takes over from ISAF. At the 
district and quarter level our outcome measures ​​y​d, r, t​​ come from both the SIGACTS 
incident and ANQAR survey data. While the SIGACTS data contains finer time-
stamps, the ANQAR survey data are collected quarterly. In order to maintain consis-
tency, we use the quarterly frequency for the ­district-level analysis. We allow each 
district to follow a specific linear trend ​​η​d​ × t​, and we allow for regional command 
specific ­nonlinear time effects (​​β​r, t​​). The RC, indexed by ​r​, served as one of the 
most important organizational units in ISAF, and it is possible that reporting prac-
tices differed by regional command; hence the choice of the time fixed effects.
Our preferred outcome for the SIGACTS data at the district level is the loga-
rithm of incidents (plus one). This specification allows us to capture changes on 
the extensive and intensive margins, but is less sensitive to vertical outliers.8 Our 
estimate of the coefficient ​γ​ captures the causal impact of the security transition as 
long as conflict in districts in different transition tranches were following common 
8 Our results are robust to alternative transformations of the dependent variable. We present these results in 
online Appendix Tables A6 and A7: the inverse hyperbolic sine (asinh), per capita specifications using different 
population measures, and level outcomes (i.e., counts) in a Poisson model. In online Appendix Section B we present 
results from another identification strategy that uses smaller ­grid-cells, and works with binary violence outcomes.


--- PAGE 14 ---
2288
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JULY 2021
trends. As discussed in the background section, the selection into different transition 
tranches was based on a variety of factors that were not clearly linked to trends in 
violence. To validate our estimates, we provide evidence in support of the common 
trends assumption based on both event studies around the transition dates, and on 
the estimation of ­pretreatment effects. We introduce these tests later. As a baseline, 
Online Appendix Table A2 shows that several baseline characteristics were not bal-
anced at the district level. However, more violent districts are not systematically 
allocated to later tranches. There are few significant differences between violence 
levels when we compare tranches 1 to 2, and 3 to 4. Only tranches 3 and 5 appear to 
have been more violent compared to the preceding tranche.9 Our basic ­district-level 
panel includes ­district-specific, linear time trends to alleviate the concerns associ-
ated with these baseline differences.
B. ISAF Troop Withdrawal
At the end of the transition process, the vast majority of the troops with ISAF 
physically left Afghanistan. While the troop withdrawal was made possible by 
the transfer of control to the ANSF, its timing was not mechanically linked to the 
formal security transfers. Unlike the transfer process, which was constrained by a 
fixed schedule of five tranches, the decision to close or hand over individual bases 
was highly discretionary and district specific. Closures were in part driven by local 
assessment of Afghan troop training and preparation to operate independent of for-
eign support. The endogenous sequencing of base closures may overstate subse-
quent battlefield gains. On the other hand, the Taliban may have been more effective 
at launching attacks against ANSF forces after withdrawal. These two dynamics 
could offset one another, yielding naïve estimates that are biased toward zero. This 
makes identification of the effect of the withdrawal phase particularly challenging.
We try to overcome these identification concerns by exploiting the importance of 
logistical constraints for the withdrawal process. As described in Section ID, a small 
number of ­military-grade airports acted as crucial logistical hubs during the with-
drawal process. We hypothesize that bases that were farthest removed from these 
airports saw their ISAF troops leave first once the transition process started (i.e., 
after 2011). We use a ­least-cost path algorithm (illustrated in Figure 4) to calculate 
distances from every district to the nearest military airport, and we use the interac-
tion of this distance measure with a dummy for the ­post-2011 period as an instru-
ment for ISAF troop withdrawal. The corresponding first stage is
(2)  ​​c​d, 
  r, t​  =  ​α​d​ + ​β​r, t​ + γ × ​Handover​d, t​ + λ × ​Hub Distance​d​ × ​Post​t​ 
	
+ ​ζ​t​ × ​X​d​ + ​η​d​ × t + ​ϵ​d, r, t​​,
where ​​c​d, r, t​​ is a dummy indicator that switches to 1 when, according to our data-
set, the last military base has closed in the district. This outcome is defined at the 
district level, and its construction is described in detail in Section IC. Since our 
9 As a robustness check, we present treatment effects by tranche in online Appendix Table A11.


--- PAGE 15 ---
2289
FETZER ET AL.: SECURITY TRANSITIONS
VOL. 111 NO. 7
measurement approach and identification strategy leverage ­district-level variation, 
we employ a ­district-level panel following the main specification for the security 
­transfer above. We keep the security transfer in the ­baseline-instrumented specifica-
tion, as it typically precedes the withdrawal. To isolate the effect of distance to mil-
itary airports, our main specifications flexibly control for ­time-varying effects of the 
distance to the nearest airport (of any type) as well as distance to the province border 
(i.e., these distance measures enter ​​X​d​​). A more demanding specification includes 
­tranche-specific time effects, which fully absorb any level effect of the transition 
captured by the variable ​​Handover​d, t​​, thus relying only on the ­within-tranche vari-
ation to estimate ​λ​.
In the second stage, we model violence outcomes ​​y​d, t​​ as follows:
(3)	
​​y​d, r, t​  =  ​α​d​ + ​β​r, t​ + γ × ​Handover​d, t​ + κ × ​c ˆ ​d, r, t​ + ​ζ​t​ × ​X​d​ 
	
+ ​η​d​ × t + ​ϵ​d, r, t​​,
where ​κ​ is the quantity of interest associated with ​c ˆ ​​d, r, t​​, the instrumented with-
drawal sequence. For the exclusion restriction to hold, the differential effect of the 
distance to ­military-grade airports after 2011 on conflict outcomes can only oper-
ate through the withdrawal of ISAF troops. Importantly, the inclusion of unit fixed 
effects addresses any ­time-invariant sources of bias that are district specific and cor-
related with proximity to military airfields, including geographic suitability for rural 
insurgent activity. Our identification strategy leverages only the differential effect of 
proximity after the withdrawal begins. Any operational disruptions across regional 
commands over time that may be correlated with the sequencing of closures are 
also absorbed in our benchmark fixed effects. The exclusion restriction could still 
be violated if the ­time-varying effects of military airfield proximity are correlated 
with ­time-varying effects of nearby market activity. The inclusion of ­time-varying 
effects of other ­market-oriented distances, such as distance to any type of airport in 
our vector of covariates ​​X​d​​, helps address this concern. The withdrawal may have 
coincided with a shift in Taliban activity away from remote areas near provincial 
borders along the outer reach of ­ISAF-supported provincial reconstruction teams, 
and toward population centers. We account for this potential source of bias by incor-
porating the ­time-varying effects of proximity to provincial borders. It is also possi-
ble that districts in different cohorts (handover tranches) were exposed to correlated 
shocks to military equipment, training, or preparation that impacted base closures. 
The importance of these factors could have varied over time as the transition and 
withdrawal neared completion. We account for these factors in two ways: directly 
controlling for the timing of the handover, and, in a separate approach, flexibly esti-
mating ­tranche-specific time effects.
C. Conflict Displacement
We now consider a specification that adds displacement effects to the 
­difference-and-differences (equation (1)) and ­instrumental-variable specifications 
(equation (3)). One potential concern is that insurgent activity is likely highly 
mobile, and that the transition to ANSF might have induced a strategic reallocation 


--- PAGE 16 ---
2290
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JULY 2021
to other districts. In this case, spillovers may affect the identification of transition 
effects: both at the onset and at the withdrawal. We consider a specification with 
spatial spillover effects to account for possible transition externalities. In what fol-
lows, we focus on the version of the ­difference-in-differences specification (1) with 
spatial controls. The ­instrumental-variable version follows with minimal changes. 
We implement a specification of the form:
(4)	
​​y​d, r, t​  =  ​α​d​ + ​β​r, t​ + γ ​Handover​d, t​ + δ​  ∑ 
j=1, j≠d
​ 
N
  ​w​d, j​ ​Handover​j, t​ 
	
+ ρ​  ∑ 
j=1, j≠d
​ 
N
  ​w​d, j​ ​y​j, r, t​ + ​η​d​ × t + ​ϵ​d, r, t​​,
where ​​w​d, j​​ captures the extent to which district ​j​ affects ​d​. The spillover effects 
may happen either because conflict in district ​d​ is affected by handover in other 
districts (through the combined transition indicator ​δ ​∑ j=1, j≠d​ 
N 
​w​d, j​ ​Handover​j, t​​, or 
“exogenous effects”) or by conflict in other districts (through ​ρ​∑ j=1, j≠d​ 
N 
​w​d, j​ ​y​d, r, t​​ or 
“endogenous effects,” both after Manski 1993). The presence of ­district-time linear 
interactions and regional ­command-time nonlinear effects control for the correlated 
effects.
We explore several specifications of (4) with different choices of weights. Our 
exercises also leverage a novel estimation strategy taken from de Paula, Rasul, and 
Souza (2020) to recover the weights ​​w​d, j​​ along with the parameters ​γ​, ​δ​, and ​ρ​ from 
within the data. We find the main treatment effects to be robust to the inclusion of 
spatial controls over a vast array of specifications. More details are provided in 
online Appendix Section A.
III.  Main Results
We first discuss the effect of the security transfer to ANSF, and then present esti-
mates of the impact of ISAF troop withdrawal.
A. Phase I: Security Handover to ANSF
Table 1 shows the effects of the security transition for the most important con-
flict outcomes in our military records: casualty events, direct fire attacks, and IED 
(Improvised Explosive Device) explosions. Our baseline ­difference-in-differences 
specification at the district level shows that the intensity of violence dropped sharply 
when the ANSF became responsible for security provision. We estimate that the 
security transition led to approximately 0.12 standard deviations (SD) decline in 
casualty events overall, with a 0.1 SD reduction in direct ­line-of-sight combat events 
and a 0.075 SD decline in IED explosions. While the inclusion of ­district-specific 
trends and RC ​×​ time fixed effects weakens the results slightly, the estimated effects 
remain large and precisely estimated in this demanding specification. To validate 
our estimates, we introduce a number of event studies, which are presented in 
Figure 5. They provide evidence of the common trends assumption that underlies 
our ­difference-in-differences estimates. We see flat trends prior to the security tran-
sition, and marked drops once security responsibility had been formally handed 


--- PAGE 17 ---
2291
FETZER ET AL.: SECURITY TRANSITIONS
VOL. 111 NO. 7
over to ANSF, as indicated by the vertical line in the subfigures. In Figure 6, we 
present coefficient estimates from our main specification for a wider set of violence 
­outcomes. These additional outcomes include casualty events involving security 
Table 1—Security Transfer to Afghan National Security Forces and Conflict 
(SIGACTS)
​log ​(x + 1)​
All casualty events
Direct fire attacks
IED explosions
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Security handover
−0.138
−0.098
−0.134
−0.066
−0.074
−0.078
(0.032)
(0.031)
(0.036)
(0.035)
(0.029)
(0.029)
Mean DV
0.920
0.920
1.145
1.145
0.686
0.686
SD DV
1.137
1.137
1.319
1.319
0.984
0.984
Observations
10,556
10,556
10,556
10,556
10,556
10,556
Number of districts
377
377
377
377
377
377
District time trend
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Notes: Regressions at the ­district-quarter level, covering the period 2008–2014. All ­regressions 
include district fixed effects and regional command ​×​ time fixed effects. Outcomes are ­subject 
to a ​log ​(x + 1)​ transformation. Standard errors are clustered at the district level and presented 
in parentheses.
Figure 5. Event Studies around the Security Transfer to Afghan National Security Forces (SIGACTS)
Notes: Event studies around the security handover to the Afghan National Security Forces, using quarterly 
­district-level data (­2008–2014). Coefficients on “time to security handover” are shown with 90 percent confidence 
intervals. The models are analogous to column 1 in Table 1, but they include ­time-to-treatment dummies. Outcomes 
are subject to a ​log (x + 1)​ transformation. Regressions include district fixed effects and regional command ​×​ time 
fixed effects.
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
Coeffcient estimate (log points)
Coeffcient estimate (log points)
Coeffcient estimate (log points)
−9−8 −7−6−5−4−3−2−1 0
1
2
3
4
5
Quarters to security handover
−9−8 −7−6−5−4−3−2−1 0
1
2
3
4
5
Quarters to security handover
−9−8 −7−6−5−4−3−2−1 0
1
2
3
4
5
Quarters to security handover
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
Panel A. Events with casualties
Panel B. Direct fre
Panel C. IED explosion


--- PAGE 18 ---
2292
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JULY 2021
forces, civilians, and insurgents, as well as indirect fire attacks. Across this broader 
set of violence measures, we observe consistent drops in ­conflict (between 0 .065 
and 0 .15 of a standard deviation) after the responsibility for security provision has 
been transferred to ANSF.
We present the analysis of the spatial spillovers in online Appendix Table A4 
for the SIGACTS data. In column 1, we replicate the coefficients from the 
­differences-in-differences analysis. Columns 2–7 initially implement standard spa-
tial spillover regressions with known and given proximity matrices (e.g., Harari and 
La Ferrara 2018). More specifically, we define as two districts as “connected” if 
they are neighbors, neighbors of neighbors; within neighboring provinces; within 
a geodesical distance of less than 250 km or 500 km; and within a driving distance 
of less than 500 km. As motivated in Section IIC, those specifications are rather 
restrictive because they impose very strong assumptions behind the mechanism of 
displacement. Thus, we also utilize the data to inform about the pattern of spillovers. 
This is accomplished by estimating the weights ​​w​d, j​​, and the results are seen in col-
umns 8–10 for various specifications. To slightly reduce the dimensionality of the 
problem, we assume that districts that are too distant (with driving distances above 
500 km and, separately with driving distances above 1,000 km) are unconnected and 
thus ​​w​d, j​  =  0​. In all cases, we observe that the majority of the point estimates for 
the treatment effects are robust to the inclusion of displacement effects.
Figure 6. Effect of the Security Transfer to Afghan National Security Forces on Conflict (SIGACTS)
Notes: Coefficients and 90 percent confidence intervals on security handover in a model that is analogous to column 
2 in Table 1. Data are at the ­district-quarter level (­2008–2014). Regressions include district fixed effects, regional 
command ​×​ time fixed effects, and ­district-specific trends. Outcomes are subject to a log (x + 1) transformation. 
Full results can be found in online Appendix Table A3.
All casualty events
Direct fire
IED explosion
Insurgent casualty events
Security force casualty events
Civilian casualty events
IDF
−0.2
−0.15
−0.1
−0.05
0
Coeffcient estimate (log points)


--- PAGE 19 ---
2293
FETZER ET AL.: SECURITY TRANSITIONS
VOL. 111 NO. 7
Table 2 shows results for ANQAR survey responses. The ANQAR data are 
only available at the district level, and, for consistency, we report results for the 
most demanding specifications at this level. Table  2 includes measures that are 
­systematically collected across many different ANQAR survey waves independently 
from the SIGACTS data. These results suggest that the shift in security perceptions 
matches the changes we observed in the tactical reports.
The share of respondents who reported security improved in the last six months 
after the ANSF took over security (column 1) increased by approximately 0.12 SD. 
They also perceive that the Taliban had grown weaker since the transition (column 
2) (0.1 SD), even if this effect is marginally insignificant. Moreover, respondents 
were more likely to have seen the Afghan National Army (ANA) (i.e., the most 
important component of the ANSF) in their village at least once a month (column 
3), and they were more likely to respond that the Afghan forces bring security to 
their area (column 4), each shifting about 0.1 SD. This suggests that the formal 
transfer of security responsibility during the transition process is clearly perceived 
as such. The consistency of our results across data types (military records and indi-
vidual survey evidence), together with our demanding empirical designs, gives us 
confidence in the robustness of this core finding.10 Yet, as shown in column 5 of 
Table 2, the security transfer does not appear to have affected the perceptions of the 
local population about who is actually in control of their area. This suggests that 
the security transfer, while being associated with improvements in the perceived 
security situation, seems to have failed at shifting the underlying fundamentals of 
the conflict. This result foreshadows our findings regarding the second phase of the 
security transition.
10 In particular for the quality of the SIGACTS data may have been affected by the security transition itself 
despite continuous collection throughout NATO’s withdrawal (as evidenced in panel A of online Appendix 
Figure A2). The consistency across the two data sources is thus reassuring.
Table 2—Security Transfer to Afghan National Security Forces and Perception of Security 
(ANQAR)
Security
Afghan National Security Force presence and control
Improved 
security
Taliban 
weaker
See Afghan National 
Army monthly
Afghan National Security 
Forces bring security
Taliban
control
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Security handover
0.027
0.025
0.031
0.024
−0.002
(0.015)
(0.017)
(0.018)
(0.014)
(0.013)
Mean DV
0.321
0.432
0.697
0.508
0.189
SD DV
0.221
0.235
0.318
0.236
0.227
Observations
8,523
7,835
8,308
8,522
8,523
Number of districts
375
375
375
375
375
Notes: Regressions at the ­district-quarter level, covering the period ­2008–2016. All regressions include district 
fixed effects, regional command ​×​ time fixed effects, and ­district-specific trends. The dependent variables mea-
sure shares of respondents at the district level. Standard errors are clustered at the district level and presented in 
parentheses.


--- PAGE 20 ---
2294
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JULY 2021
B. Phase II: Withdrawal of ISAF Troops
The initial transfer of security to the ANSF was followed by the gradual closure of 
ISAF bases. As discussed in Section IC, the logistical challenges of organizing the 
troop withdrawal imposed a certain structure on the military pullout. We ­instrument 
the sequence of base closure with the interaction of the distance to the closest mili-
tary airport hub and a dummy for the ­post-2011 period (see equations (2) and (3)). 
Table 3 presents the ­first-stage results and confirms that our interacted distance mea-
sure does a good job predicting the timing of base closures in a district. This remains 
true when we control for distance to the closest airport of any type (i.e., including 
­nonmilitary airports) and province borders in column 2, as well as for ­time-varying 
effects of the transition tranche in column 3.
We take the instrumental variable strategy and contrast our IV estimates with the 
naïve OLS results in Table 4. The OLS results, presented in panel A, suggest that 
base closures are not associated with any significant changes in conflict outcomes. 
As we argued earlier, the OLS estimates could suffer from endogeneity problems 
because the ­district-specific sequencing of base closures was highly discretionary 
and likely influenced by local assessments of Afghan troop training and battlefield 
readiness. If bases were closed earlier in districts where violence was expected to 
decrease, the OLS coefficients we estimate would mask any ­violence-enhancing 
effect of foreign troop withdrawal. If the magnitude of these ­cross-cutting effects 
is comparable, we would expect to estimate an OLS result close to zero, which is 
what we find.
Panel B of Table 4 presents our IV results. When we instrument for the sequenc-
ing of base closure using the ­time-varying effect of military airfield proximity, we 
find a consistent ­violence-increasing effect of the base closure on our main conflict 
Table 3—Coalition Troop Withdrawal: First Stage
Troop withdrawal
(1)
(2)
(3)
Travel distance to military airport ​×​ post 2011
1.728
1.898
2.007
(0.237)
(0.235)
(0.236)
Security handover
0.193
0.190
(0.028)
(0.029)
Mean DV
0.388
0.388
0.388
SD DV
0.487
0.487
0.487
­F-statistic on instrument
53.325
65.292
72.141
Observations
13,572
13,572
13,572
Number of districts
377
377
377
IV control set ​×​ time fixed effects
No
Yes
Yes
Tranche ​×​ time fixed effects
No
No
Yes
Notes: Regressions at the ­district-quarter level, covering the period ­2008–2016. All regres-
sions include district fixed effects, regional command ​×​ time fixed effects, and ­district-specific 
trends. The additional IV control set includes the distance to any airport and to the province 
border. The dependent variable is Troop withdrawal, which is a binary indicator for the last 
recorded base closure, retrograde, or handover at the district level. Standard errors are clustered 
at the district level and presented in parentheses.


--- PAGE 21 ---
2295
FETZER ET AL.: SECURITY TRANSITIONS
VOL. 111 NO. 7
outcomes in columns 1 through 6. The ­post-withdrawal increase in violence ranges 
from approximately 0.4 to 0.7 SD. In fact, contrasting the direct effect of the secu-
rity handover with the effect of the base closures in columns 1, 3, and 5, the increase 
in violence due to the base closures fully offsets the reductions in combat activity 
due to the security transfer, with a net increase in conflict of approximately 0.3 SD.
This finding is robust to using exclusively ­within-tranche variation, by including 
a set of tranche ​×​ time fixed effects (in columns 2, 4, and 6). Hence, the uptick in 
violence cannot be explained by a general time pattern that is specific to districts 
belonging to an individual tranche. Rather, the increased violence appears to reflect 
an effect that is specific to the physical withdrawal of international troops indepen-
dent of the transfer announcement. In Figure 7 we study a broader set of conflict 
outcomes at the district level. We also implement our spatial econometric technique 
for calibrating network weights, and we introduce them in the IV framework. In 
online Appendix Table A5 we confirm that the estimates are robust to the inclusion 
of spillover controls.
To what extent do these distinct effects on conflict outcomes map into changes 
in the perceived security situation? In Table 5, we present results studying ANQAR 
­survey-response data. In panel A, we estimate both the effect of the security tran-
sition onset, as well as the effect of the (instrumented) physical base closure. The 
Table 4—Coalition Troop Withdrawal and Conflict (SIGACTS)
log (x + 1)
All casualty events
Direct fire attacks
IED explosions
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A. District level: OLS
Troop withdrawal
0.003
−0.000
−0.006
0.001
−0.008
−0.008
(0.035)
(0.037)
(0.041)
(0.043)
(0.029)
(0.031)
Security handover
−0.103
−0.057
−0.094
(0.031)
(0.036)
(0.029)
Mean DV
0.920
0.920
1.145
1.145
0.686
0.686
SD DV
1.137
1.137
1.319
1.319
0.984
0.984
Observations
10,556
10,556
10,556
10,556
10,556
10,556
Number of districts
377
377
377
377
377
377
Tranche ​×​ time fixed effects
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Panel B. District level: IV
Troop withdrawal
0.666
0.616
0.572
0.495
0.773
0.730
(0.308)
(0.296)
(0.327)
(0.310)
(0.305)
(0.287)
Security handover
−0.205
−0.146
−0.214
(0.059)
(0.063)
(0.062)
Mean DV
0.920
0.920
1.145
1.145
0.686
0.686
SD DV
1.137
1.137
1.319
1.319
0.984
0.984
Weak IV statistic
48.751
57.882
48.751
57.882
48.751
57.882
Observations
10,556
10,556
10,556
10,556
10,556
10,556
Number of districts
377
377
377
377
377
377
Tranche ​×​ time fixed effects
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Notes: Regressions at the ­district-quarter level, covering the period 2008–2014. All regressions include dis-
trict fixed effects, regional command ​×​ time fixed effects, and ­district-specific trends. The instrument used for 
Troop ­withdrawal is the interaction of the travel distance to the nearest military airport and an indicator for the 
­post-2011 period. The IV control set includes distance to any airport ​×​ time fixed effects, and distance to prov-
ince borders ​×​ time fixed effects. Outcomes are subject to a log (x + 1) transformation. The weak IV statistic is the 
­Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald ­F-statistic. Standard errors are clustered at the district level and presented in parentheses.


--- PAGE 22 ---
2296
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JULY 2021
picture that emerges is consistent with our findings from the SIGACTS conflict 
data; while the transition onset is associated with a marked improvement in the 
perceived security situation, the physical withdrawal and base closure are associ-
ated with a reported worsening of the security situation. Accounting for both phases 
of the security transition, perceived security deteriorated by more than  0.4 SD. 
In addition, ­perceptions that the Taliban had grown weaker strongly reverse, sug-
gesting that civilians believe the Taliban had, indeed, become stronger after bases 
were closed. Despite a notable increase in reported Afghan troop patrols, civilians 
suggested that local forces were less likely to bring security after the withdrawal 
of foreign forces. In panel B, we study the same outcomes, yet, only exploiting 
­within-tranche variation. This precludes the estimation of the security transfer to 
ANSF because this variable is perfectly collinear with the ­tranche-by-time fixed 
effects. Our results remain robust, suggesting that the closure of bases is indeed 
associated with a significant worsening of the security situation. Before turning to 
a discussion of the underlying mechanism, we highlight the additional robustness 
checks that we performed.
C. Robustness
In the online Appendix, we introduce a range of robustness checks.
Figure 7. Coalition Troop Withdrawal and Conflict (SIGACTS)
Notes: Coefficients and 90 percent confidence intervals on “Troop withdrawal” in a model that is analogous to 
­column 1 in Table 4. Data are at the ­district-quarter level (­2008–2014). All regressions include district fixed effects, 
regional command ​×​ time fixed effects, and ­district-specific trends. The instrument used for “Troop withdrawal” 
is the interaction of the travel distance to the nearest military airport and an indicator for the ­post-2011 period. 
The IV control set includes distance to any airport ​×​ time fixed effects, and distance to province borders ​×​ time 
fixed effects. Outcomes are subject to a log (x + 1) transformation. Full results can be found in online Appendix 
Table A3 .
All casualty events
Direct fire
IED explosion
Insurgent casualty events
Security force casualty events
Civilian casualty events
IDF
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
Coeffcient estimate (log points)


--- PAGE 23 ---
2297
FETZER ET AL.: SECURITY TRANSITIONS
VOL. 111 NO. 7
Matched Distant Gridcell Pairs.—In an attempt to relax the identifica-
tion assumption that underlies our main district level ­difference-in-differences 
approach, we change the unit of analysis to 10 ​×​ 10 km gridcells. This is only 
­possible for the SIGACTS data, as the ANQAR survey data are reported at the dis-
trict level. In the resulting ­high-resolution dataset, we construct pairs of matched 
gridcells using ­baseline population, elevation, road connections, and ­land-cover 
data. The ­gridcell-level outcomes show reductions in violence that are larger 
although it should be kept in mind that this is at the extensive margin of our vio-
lence outcomes. For more details on the matching procedure, see online Appendix 
Section B. For the summary statistics at the gridcell level, see Table A8. Results 
for the gridcell analysis are presented in Table A10, along with event study graphs 
in Figure A3.
­Tranche-by-Tranche Effects.—We look at heterogeneous effects by tranche in 
Table A11. We confirm that the effects are not driven by a single tranche. Even if 
the magnitudes differ across tranches, the signs are consistent and significant for key 
outcomes in multiple tranches.
­Pretreatment Effects.—We study whether the security transfer to ANSF has 
effects prior to the treatment announcement for the broader set of outcomes in 
Table 5—Coalition Troop Withdrawal and Security Perceptions (ANQAR)
Security
Afghan National Security Forces presence and control
Improved 
security
Taliban 
weaker
See Afghan National 
Army Monthly
Afghan National Security 
Forces bring security
Taliban 
control
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A. District level
Troop withdrawal
−0.177
−0.205
0.160
−0.121
−0.067
(0.054)
(0.056)
(0.078)
(0.056)
(0.057)
Security handover
0.062
0.061
−0.008
0.044
0.009
(0.019)
(0.020)
(0.022)
(0.019)
(0.018)
Mean DV
0.321
0.432
0.697
0.508
0.189
SD DV
0.221
0.235
0.318
0.236
0.227
Weak IV statistic
63.465
63.577
63.390
63.476
63.465
Observations
8,523
7,835
8,308
8,522
8,523
Number of districts
375
375
375
375
375
Panel B. District level, Tranche ​×​ time fixed effects
Troop withdrawal
−0.171
−0.184
0.132
−0.127
−0.062
(0.053)
(0.055)
(0.075)
(0.053)
(0.056)
Mean DV
0.321
0.432
0.697
0.508
0.189
SD DV
0.221
0.235
0.318
0.236
0.227
Weak IV statistic
71.736
72.213
71.722
71.743
71.736
Observations
8,523
7,835
8,308
8,522
8,523
Number of districts
375
375
375
375
375
Notes: Regressions at the ­district-quarter level, covering the period ­2008–2016. All regressions include dis-
trict fixed effects, regional command ​×​ time fixed effects, and ­district-specific trends. The instrument used for  
Troop ­withdrawal is the interaction of the travel distance to the nearest military airport and an indicator for the 
­post-2011 period. The IV control set includes distance to any airport ​×​ time fixed effects, and distance to prov-
ince borders × time fixed effects. The dependent variables measure shares of respondents at the district level. The 
weak IV statistic is the ­Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald ­F-statistic. Standard errors are clustered at the district level and 
­presented in parentheses.


--- PAGE 24 ---
2298
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JULY 2021
Figures A4 and A5 . The vast majority of these ­pretreatment effects are insignificant 
and small compared to the actual treatment effects.
IV.  Mechanisms
Afghanistan’s security transition could affect violence outcomes through a large 
set of mechanisms. We consider several plausible alternative mechanisms below.
A. Withdrawal of Foreign Targets
In principle, the transfer of security to the ANSF could reduce violence because 
the ability of the Taliban to mobilize was weakened by the security transition. 
However, this explanation cannot account for the increase in violence we observe 
after the base closures. Another interpretation of the reduction in local violence 
following the security transfer, is that the ANSF were more effective, for example 
because they monopolized violence better than the multinational ISAF, or because 
they coordinated more effectively with the local population. In this sense, foreign 
troops were perhaps no longer required to support security provision. These mecha-
nisms are similarly consistent with the decline in violence after the first phase of the 
transition, but are inconsistent with the ­violence-increasing effect of base closures 
and withdrawal.
B. Complementarities during the Transition Period
Our main results are consistent with the idea that complementarities between 
ISAF and ANSF generate improved security outcomes, to the extent that ISAF base 
closures eliminate the gains in security outcomes that accompany the security trans-
fer. These complementarities could arise because ISAF monitors the ANSF, and 
provides military support after local forces take operational command. The com-
bination of the ANSF leading operations and receiving feedback, combat support, 
and development assistance could have reduced violence during the first phase. 
These gains could have been reversed with the end of overwatch and the physical 
withdrawal of troops. In Table 6, we investigate the complementarities mechanism. 
Additional monitoring during the first phase could have reduced misbehavior by 
Afghan troops, improving community relations, but we find no evidence of that type 
of shift (column 1). We also find no evidence of a change in perceived ability of the 
ANSF to operate independently of ISAF, or of ANSF capacity to defeat the Taliban 
following the security handover (columns 2 and 3). We also find no evidence that one 
dominant form of development assistance, the US Army Commander’s Emergency 
Response Program (CERP), was targeted to enhance the effectiveness of Afghan 
forces during the transition process (column 4).
We also investigate potential complementarities in tactical support activities 
(online Appendix Table A12). In particular, we might expect that foreign forces 
would be marginally more likely to respond to violent events that trigger combat 
support following the security handover. Columns 1 and 3 of online Appendix Table 
A12 show that close air support and medical evacuations are highly correlated with 
contemporaneous close combat and direct fire attacks, yet columns 2 and 4 show no 


--- PAGE 25 ---
2299
FETZER ET AL.: SECURITY TRANSITIONS
VOL. 111 NO. 7
marginal changes in combat support after the security handover. Column 5 shows that 
IED explosions coincide with additional bomb clearance, yet bomb neutralization 
does not significantly improve during the security handover (column 6). It is still pos-
sible that Afghan troops experienced a temporary, unobserved shock to their fighting 
capacity. One such shock would be ­large-scale transfers of ammunition and weaponry 
to Afghan troops whose supplies had been depleted before the withdrawal of foreign 
troops. Prior theoretical work suggests this would lead to a composition shift in com-
bat (Bueno de Mesquita 2013), reducing ­close-range attacks and increasing roadside 
bomb deployment. However, Tables 1 and 4 indicate that this type of tactical shift 
did not occur following the handover. Overall, we fail to identify any clear evidence 
consistent with ­short-lived tactical complementarities that could explain the main  
results.
C. Lying Low
One compelling mechanism that could account for our findings is a strategic deci-
sion by the Taliban to scale back violence during the transition period. Local secu-
rity transfers were particularly important because they created an overwatch period 
in which the relative capacity of the Taliban and the ANSF was signaled to ISAF 
forces. As such, the Taliban had an incentive to understate its capacity in a manner 
that was both difficult to detect, and that confirmed NATO forces’ biases (i.e., that 
Afghan security forces were ably trained and capable of delivering security on their 
own). We briefly formalize this logic in a simple game in which violence serves 
as a signal about the relative capacities of the Taliban and the ANSF. This formal-
ization helps situate the conflict patterns we observe as the equilibrium outcome 
Table 6—Security Force Activity
Improper 
behavior by 
ANA
ANA needs full 
international 
support
ANA will most 
likely defeat 
insurgents
CERP spending
log (x + 1)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Troop withdrawal
0.009
0.099
−0.056
1.419
(0.092)
(0.048)
(0.054)
(2.255)
Security handover
−0.012
−0.009
0.015
−0.567
(0.019)
(0.015)
(0.016)
(0.480)
Mean DV
0.156
0.243
0.380
3.502
SD DV
0.195
0.191
0.229
5.359
Weak IV statistic
27.208
63.476
63.465
48.751
Observations
6,486
8,521
8,523
10,556
Number of districts
360
375
375
377
Notes: Regressions at the ­district-quarter level, covering the period ­2008–2016 (­2008–2014 
for column 4). All regressions include district fixed effects, regional command ​×​ time fixed 
effects, and ­district-specific trends. The instrument used for Troop withdrawal is the interaction 
of the travel distance to the nearest military airport and an indicator for the ­post-2011 period. 
The IV control set includes distance to any airport ​×​ time fixed effects, and distance to prov-
ince borders ​×​ time fixed effects. The dependent variables in columns 1–3 measure the share 
of respondents in the ANQAR survey at the district level. Column 4 contains CERP spending, 
which is subject to a log (x + 1) transformation. The CERP data include projected spending 
in 2014. The weak IV statistic is the ­Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald ­F-statistic. Standard errors are 
clustered at the district level and presented in parentheses.
