

--- PAGE 1 ---
American Economic Review 2020, 110(4): 1019–1054 
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20160256
1019
The Effects of Income Transparency on ­Well-Being: 
Evidence from a Natural Experiment†
By Ricardo ­Perez-Truglia*
In 2001, Norwegian tax records became easily accessible online, 
allowing everyone in the country to observe the incomes of everyone 
else. According to the income comparisons model, this change in 
transparency can widen the gap in ­well-being between richer and 
poorer individuals. Using survey data from 1985–2013 and multiple 
identification strategies, we show that the higher transparency 
increased the gap in happiness between richer and poorer individuals 
by 29 percent, and it increased the life satisfaction gap by 21 percent. 
We provide ­back-of-the-envelope estimates of the importance of 
income comparisons, and discuss implications for the ongoing 
debate on transparency policies. (JEL D31, H24, I31, K34)
The income comparisons model proposes that individual ­well-being largely 
depends on how that individual’s income compares to the incomes of others (Luttmer 
2005). This is a fundamental aspect of individual preferences, yet no consensus 
exists about the importance of income comparisons.1 In this study, we offer novel 
evidence based on a unique natural experiment: in 2001, Norwegian tax records 
became easily accessible online, allowing everyone in the country to observe the 
incomes of everyone else quickly and easily. We test the hypothesis that, consistent 
with the model of income comparisons, increased income transparency widens the 
gap in ­well-being between richer and poorer individuals.
Tax records have been public in Norway since the nineteenth century, but they 
have not always been easily accessible. Before 2001, one had to make a formal 
request in person at the tax agency to see someone else’s income. In the fall of 2001, 
the Norwegian media digitized tax records and created websites that allowed any 
1 This question is important to understand preferences more deeply, and also due to its implications for income 
taxation and other policies. For example, income comparisons can create positional externalities that reduce social 
welfare and could be corrected with taxes (e.g., Boskin and Sheshinski 1978, Frank 1985).
* Anderson School of Management, University of California, Los Angeles (email: ricardo.truglia@anderson.
ucla.edu). Marianne Bertrand was the coeditor for this article. Thanks to Ipsos MMI for providing access to the sur-
vey data. Thanks to Ottar Hellevik for all his help with this study. Thanks to the reviewers for invaluable feedback. 
I also benefited from the feedback from several colleagues as well as seminar discussants at Harvard, Princeton, 
Yale, Universidad de San Andres, LMU Munich, ITAM, CIDE, Universidad Católica de Chile, Universidad de la 
República, RAND, the BESH Research Symposium, the AEA Annual Meetings, the USC Happiness Conference, 
and the NBER Summer Institute. Diego Marino Fages provided outstanding research assistance. The first draft of 
this paper circulated in August 2015 under the title “Measuring the Value of Self- and Social-Image.”
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20160256 to visit the article page for additional materials and author  
disclosure statement.


--- PAGE 2 ---
1020
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2020
individual with internet access to search anyone’s tax records. Every Norwegian was 
one click away from finding out the incomes of everyone else in the country.
We use various data sources to show the massive popularity of these online tax 
lists. During the busiest week of the year, these websites were more popular than 
YouTube. We also show that, rather than using the tax lists for legitimate goals (e.g., 
uncovering corruption or tax evasion), most used the websites to snoop on friends, 
relatives, and social contacts. For example, users could create leaderboards showing 
the highest and lowest earners among their Facebook friends or maps showing the 
incomes of everyone living around a specific location. This behavior became so 
pervasive that the Norwegian media dubbed it “tax porn.”
Because income transparency facilitates income comparisons, it can widen the 
gap in ­well-being between richer and poorer individuals. Poorer individuals often 
lose this game of income comparisons. For example, if they learn that they are 
poorer than they thought (Cruces, ­Perez-Truglia, and Tetaz 2013), it can lower 
their ­self-esteem. If their social contacts learn how poor they are, it can reduce their 
­social-esteem. In contrast, richer individuals often benefit from this game. Learning 
that they are richer than they thought can boost their ­self-esteem. And being looked 
up by their social contacts can boost their ­social-esteem.2
To test this hypothesis, we measure the effect of the increase in transparency on 
the gradient between subjective ­well-being and individual income rank (henceforth 
referred to as the ­happiness-income gradient). We use survey data from Norway 
from 1985–2013 that include the two most widely used measures of subjective 
­well-being: happiness and life satisfaction. Despite some limitations of these sub-
jective measures, evidence suggests that they contain useful information about 
­well-being. For example, life satisfaction and happiness have been shown to be sig-
nificantly correlated with objective measures of ­well-being and with decision utility 
(Di Tella, MacCulloch, and Oswald 2003; Benjamin et al. 2012).
Consistent with the hypothesis of income comparisons, we show that the 2001 
income transparency change led to a 29 percent increase in the ­happiness-income 
gradient ( ­p-value  =  0.005) and a 21 percent increase in the life ­satisfaction-income 
gradient (­ p-value  =  0.026).
We use multiple strategies to identify the causal effect of the transparency change 
of 2001. First, we conduct an ­event-study analysis and find that the ­happiness-income 
gradient stayed constant in the years before the change, increased in 2001, and per-
sisted at the higher level during the subsequent 12 years of higher transparency.
Second, we identify individuals who were most likely to be exposed to the effects 
of online tax lists, based on observable characteristics that predict internet access. We 
show that, between 1985 and 2000, the ­happiness-income gradient remained stable 
for individuals with low and high internet access. After 2001, the ­happiness-income 
gradient remained at the ­pre-2001 level for individuals with lower internet access 
but increased substantially and persisted at the higher level for individuals with 
higher internet access.
2 Different individuals may react differently to the increased transparency. For example, while some rich indi-
viduals may feel happy that their neighbors caught a glimpse of their income, others may feel uneasy about the same 
situation (e.g., if they do not feel deserving of their high income). In this study, we can only measure which of these 
different mechanisms dominates on average.


--- PAGE 3 ---
1021
PEREZ-TRUGLIA: THE EFFECT OF INCOME TRANSPARENCY ON WELL-BEING
VOL. 110 NO. 4
Our third identification strategy reproduces the analysis using similar survey data 
from Germany, a country that was not affected by the Norwegian change in income 
transparency. Similar results for Germany would indicate that another factor, such as 
the ­dot-com bubble, caused the change in the ­happiness-income gradient in Norway. 
In sharp contrast to the Norwegian findings, however, the life ­satisfaction-income 
gradient did not change around 2001 in Germany. The ­event-study analysis shows 
that this gradient remained stable in Germany from 1985 to 2013, both in the popu-
lation at large and in the ­subpopulations of individuals with higher and lower inter-
net access.
Anecdotal evidence supports our finding that higher income transparency increased 
the ­well-being gap between richer and poorer households. For example, the media 
reported that the online tax lists led to bullying of kids from poorer households and 
that adults from poorer households felt that they disappointed themselves and others 
(Steinsland 2008, Associated Press 2009). Our findings also align with survey data 
indicating that, relative to richer households, poorer households were more likely to 
oppose the income transparency policy (Langset 2011).
The effects of income transparency may operate through multiple mechanisms. 
We provide suggestive evidence for one specific mechanism, ­self-perceptions. 
According to this channel, richer individuals may be happier because they learn that 
they are richer than they thought, and poorer individuals may be unhappier because 
they learn that they are poorer than they thought. We show that, indeed, transparency 
increased the gradient between perceived income rank and actual income rank by 
8.5 percent (­ p-value  ​<​  0.001) and the gradient between the perceived adequacy 
of one’s income and income rank by 4.7 percent (­ p-value  =  0.083). This evidence 
cannot prove or rule out the ­self-perceptions channel, but it does serve as suggestive 
evidence. Moreover, the perceived rank and income adequacy gradients (8.5 percent 
and 4.7 percent) are smaller than the changes in the happiness and life satisfaction 
gradients (29 percent and 21 percent), which suggests the presence of other mediat-
ing factors besides ­self-perceptions.
We use the estimated effects of transparency to quantify the importance of income 
comparisons. Our ­back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that, as a conservative 
lower bound, income comparisons accounted for 22 percent of the happiness that 
individuals in Norway derived from their incomes during the period of higher trans-
parency. Moreover, we show that this lower bound is consistent with the effect of 
relative income on happiness, as reported in related studies.
Our evidence also relates to the ongoing debate on transparency. Technological 
advances have made it possible for everyone to know potentially everything about 
everyone else, sparking debates on whether the government should disclose its data, 
such as tax records. Some arguments that favor or oppose transparency are rooted in 
philosophical grounds.3 However, most arguments seem to be based on the poten-
tial effects of transparency. In particular, detractors of income transparency argued 
that the tax lists were used in despicable ways to harm the ­well-being of poorer 
3 For example, some of the supporters of income transparency in Norway see it as a fundamental principle of 
democracy, while some opponents see it as a violation of privacy rights.


--- PAGE 4 ---
1022
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2020
­individuals.4 This argument, however, was based on qualitative and anecdotal evi-
dence. This study provides the first quantitative evidence on this matter.
Beyond the Norwegian experience, information disclosure may directly affect 
­well-being in other contexts. In the 2000s, Sweden, Iceland, and Finland had to 
decide whether to make their tax records as easily accessible as in Norway. Outside 
of Scandinavia, governments disclose all sorts of sensitive information, such as the 
salaries of public employees (Card et al. 2012, Mas 2017), individual contributions 
to political campaigns (­Perez-Truglia and Cruces 2017), and identities of criminals 
and tax delinquents (Linden and Rockoff 2008, ­Perez-Truglia and Troiano 2018). 
Our findings suggest that it is important to measure the ­well-being effects of disclos-
ing sensitive data and to account for them in the ­cost-benefit analysis.
This paper relates to various strands of literature. Most important, it relates to a 
literature on the effect of relative income on ­well-being. In a seminal contribution, 
Easterlin (1974) showed evidence that happiness and income are positively cor-
related across individuals within a country but that average happiness in a country 
does not seem to rise over time as average income rises. One standard explanation 
for the paradox is that happiness depends on relative income. Within a given coun-
try, richer individuals have higher relative income, so they are happier. However, as 
every individual in the country becomes richer, the average relative income stays 
constant, and thus average happiness also remains constant. Consistent with this 
interpretation, several studies have shown that, holding own income constant, sub-
jective ­well-being decreases with the mean income of neighbors (Luttmer 2005, 
­Ferrer-i-Carbonell 2005).5
However, this evidence is subject to concerns about causal identification. For 
example, the Balassa–Samuelson model (Balassa 1964, Samuelson 1964) predicts 
that consumer prices should be higher in areas where nominal incomes are higher. 
Thus, even in the absence of income comparisons, happiness should be negatively 
correlated to the average income of neighbors, reflecting a higher cost of living. More 
generally, the average income in an area could be correlated with other unobservable 
attributes of the location that also affect ­well-being, thus generating ­omitted-variable 
biases. We contribute to this literature by presenting novel evidence on the effects of 
relative income on happiness that relies on a new identification approach, based on 
­quasi-experimental variation in income transparency.
This study also relates to Bø, Slemrod, and Thoresen (2015), which measured 
the effect of the Norwegian disclosure of tax records on tax evasion. Disclosing 
tax records may deter tax evasion by encouraging others with relevant information 
about true tax liability to come forward and by threatening evaders with social sanc-
tions (see also ­Perez-Truglia and Troiano 2018). Bø, Slemrod, and Thoresen (2015) 
found that the change in income disclosure increased reported income among busi-
ness owners by 2.7 percent, resulting in a total gain of 0.2 percent in income tax 
4 This was by no means the only negative consequence from income transparency that was debated. For exam-
ple, some detractors of open disclosure argued that the tax records could be used by criminals to target rich individ-
uals. However, in a letter to the Ministry of Justice, the Norwegian police noted that their investigations ruled this 
out as a significant source for concern (Dagens Næringsliv 2010).
5 There are some conflicting accounts about the evidence. See, for instance, Hagerty and Veenhoven (2003), 
Stevenson and Wolfers (2008), Easterlin et al. (2010), and Easterlin (2017) on the effect of income growth on 
happiness, and Senik (2004), Clark, ­Westergård-Nielsen, and Kristensen (2009), and Deaton and Stone (2013) on 
the effect of relative income on happiness.


--- PAGE 5 ---
1023
PEREZ-TRUGLIA: THE EFFECT OF INCOME TRANSPARENCY ON WELL-BEING
VOL. 110 NO. 4
­revenues. This evidence confirms a benefit of disclosure, as alleged by its support-
ers. We present evidence on an unintended effect, income comparisons, as alleged 
by detractors of income transparency.
This work also relates to the study by Card et al. (2012) of the effects of income 
transparency on job satisfaction. The researchers sent ­emails to a random sample 
of university employees with information on how to access a website that listed the 
wages of all employees working in the same university. In a ­follow-up survey, they 
found that for workers with ­below-median salaries within their unit and position, 
having access to the website decreased satisfaction with their wages and their jobs. 
Consistent with this finding, Rege and Solli (2015) shows evidence that the disclo-
sure of tax records in Norway increased the probability of quitting among workers 
with lower salaries. Their findings suggest that some poor individuals may benefit 
from income transparency, because they can find out if they are ­underpaid and look 
for a better job. On the contrary, our evidence suggests that income transparency 
increased the ­well-being of richer individuals at the expense of the ­well-being of 
poorer individuals.
Last, this study relates to a literature documenting how individuals misperceive 
their positions in the income distribution and how providing objective information 
can correct these misperceptions (Cruces, ­Perez-Truglia, and Tetaz 2013; Karadja, 
Mollerstrom, and Seim 2017). These studies are based on artificial contexts in which 
researchers provide information through a survey. We contribute to this literature by 
exploiting the variation in information access in a natural, ­large-scale setting and by 
showing that correcting these misperceptions may affect ­well-being.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section I describes relevant details 
about the disclosure policy. Section II presents the econometric specification and the 
survey data. Section III presents the results. The last section concludes.
I.  Relevant Institutional Details
A. Origin of the Online Tax Lists
Although tax records have been publicly available in Norway since the middle of 
the nineteenth century, they were not easily accessible before 2001. Individuals who 
wanted to learn about someone else’s income had to visit the local tax office or city 
hall during a ­three-week period and search through a book with records for thou-
sands of taxpayers from the same municipality.6 In the fall of 2001, a Norwegian 
newspaper made these tax records searchable online for the first time so that any 
Norwegian with internet access could view them easily and at any time (see Figure 1 
for a screenshot of this website). All major newspapers soon created their own web-
sites, which remained popular in the country for the following decade.7 These web-
sites listed full names and net incomes (see Figure 2 for a sample search result), and 
6 In selected municipalities and only shortly before 2001, some local organizations sold books with information 
from the local tax rolls. Bø, Slemrod, and Thoresen (2015) exploits variation across these municipalities to identify 
the effects of transparency. We cannot use this same identification strategy because we lack sufficient data (we 
would need a survey sample orders of magnitude higher and with a higher frequency).
7 The following are some sample websites: www.skattelister.no, www.nrk.no/skatt, www.tu.no/skattelister, and 
skatt.na24.no.


--- PAGE 6 ---
1024
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2020
could also list additional information such as taxes, net worth, birth years, cities, 
and postal codes. These websites allowed visitors to search by multiple fields. For 
example, visitors could search for their own last name to find relatives. Or they 
could search by postal code to find neighbors.
Although all other Scandinavian countries (except Denmark) make tax records 
publicly available, the Norwegian tax disclosure during 2001–2013 was exceptional 
because of its accessibility (Langset 2011).8 In Finland, accessibility of tax records 
is similar to that in Norway prior to 2001, requiring individuals to visit the tax 
agency in person (Kostyukov 2018).9 In Sweden, the requests for tax returns are 
not anonymous and must be done by phone, making this practice much less popular 
than it is in Norway.10 In Iceland, tax records are also difficult to access and avail-
able during two weeks of the year only.
B. Evolution of the Online Tax Lists
Between 2001 and 2013 (the last year of our survey data), several factors may 
have contributed to increased or decreased use of online tax lists, though none of 
these changes in visibility was remotely comparable in size to the change of 2001.
8 In other countries, information about incomes can be easily accessed online for a subset of the population (e.g., 
public employees in some US states).
9 In the day that the tax records are released, a few dozen Finnish journalists line up in the tax agency to look up 
the incomes of some ­newsworthy individuals. However, that number pales in comparison to the millions of searches 
conducted in Norway every year. One exception of the Finnish law is that the tax records are searchable online for 
the top 10,000 richest individuals. Also, there was a period in which requests for tax records could be done over 
the phone. However, to the best of our knowledge, this option was not nearly as widespread as the online searches 
were in Norway.
10 In 2006, a credit reporting company called Ratsit published a website with a search tool for tax records similar 
to the ones offered in Norway (The Local 2015). However, it was taken down by the Sweden’s Chancellor of Justice 
shortly thereafter. The website was later allowed, but the searches were ­non-anonymous and subject to a fee. In 
2015, this same company began selling physical copies of the tax records at the municipality level, just like in some 
Norwegian municipalities prior to 2001.
Figure 1. Screenshot of Search Tool for Tax Records
Note: Intro website from skattelister.no as of June 16, 2010. 
Source: web.archive.org


--- PAGE 7 ---
1025
PEREZ-TRUGLIA: THE EFFECT OF INCOME TRANSPARENCY ON WELL-BEING
VOL. 110 NO. 4
Some factors may have contributed to a gradual increase in income visibility. For 
example, the media added convenient and engaging ways to browse tax records. One 
newspaper released an app that connected to Facebook and automatically created 
leaderboards showing the highest and lowest earners among Facebook friends, as in 
Figure 3.11 Another application allowed users to tap on a map to see the incomes of 
everyone living near that position.12 Just like the websites, these smartphone apps 
were incredibly popular (Jørgenrud 2009, Teknologirådet 2010).13 There was also a 
modest increase in internet access during the 2000s, which may have contributed to 
higher income visibility: according to Statistics Norway, the share of internet users 
increased from 72.8 percent in 2002 to 95.1 percent in 2013.
On the other hand, some government regulations may have decreased the degree 
of income transparency. From 2004 to 2006, regulators introduced restrictions to 
the use of the tax lists: visitors had to use an official search tool conduct searches, 
which was only available during three weeks of the year (Teknologirådet 2010). The 
official search tool was easy to use, and the newspapers seamlessly embedded it in 
their own websites. The ­three-week restriction may not have had significant effects 
either, as individuals could conduct the same number of searches, just in a concen-
trated period. Indeed, most searches occurred during that same ­three-week period 
even when the restriction was not in place, because the timing coincided with tax 
record updates. For example, about 60 percent of data searches published in October 
2013 were conducted during the first three weeks after the tax lists were posted (E24 
2014), even though individuals were allowed to search all year long.
11 Also, the ­top-right corner of Figure 1 shows an advertisement for one of these apps.
12 Panel B of online Appendix Figure A.1 shows a screenshot of one of these apps.
13 In addition to showing individual records, some of the websites and apps offered tools to navigate aggregate 
data. For example, panel C of online Appendix Figure A.1 shows the screenshot of one of the websites offering an 
interactive tool to figure out the user’s position in the income distribution of the country or a city (Dagens Næringsliv 
2014). Also, the data published on the tax lists were eventually indexed by all the popular search engines. As a con-
sequence, searching for the name of a Norwegian citizen in Google would show the individual’s tax record at the 
top of the search results (Teknologirådet 2010).
Figure 2. Screenshot of a Sample Search Result from the Search Tool
Note: Search result from skatt.na24.no as of August 1, 2015. 
Source: web.archive.org


--- PAGE 8 ---
1026
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2020
The 2004 restrictions were removed in 2007, with no new restrictions added 
until 2011. From 2011 to 2013, the government required individuals who wanted 
to search tax records to log in to the official website of the tax agency using a ­PIN 
code and a password.14 Most individuals presumably already had accounts for filing 
their taxes and other online services.15 Search volume probably declined due to this 
added hassle, but it remained substantial (Thoresen 2013).
The final and most significant restriction was introduced in 2014, when the 
searches became ­non-anonymous. This change is not relevant for our empirical 
analysis because it occurred after the last year of the survey data. However, we 
discuss this regulatory change below, because it provides evidence about how indi-
viduals had been using the search lists.
14 The 2011 legislation also introduced a limit on the maximum number of searches per month (500), although 
it seems that such restriction would not be binding for the vast majority of individuals. Also, the government still 
allowed the media to disseminate some information from the tax lists, such as the lists of the ­top-100 richest individ-
uals or break downs of average income by county; see, for example, the following website, which is still functional: 
www.vg.no/spesial/skattelister/. For reference, panel A of online Appendix Figure A.1 shows a screenshot of the 
search tool from the official website of the tax agency as of 2015.
15 However, individuals who were not registered in the tax agency, such as minors or visitors from other coun-
tries, could not log into the website.
Figure 3. Screenshot of a Smartphone Application Showing an Income Leaderboard
Source: Jan Omdahl, “Nå får du skattesøk på iPhone,” Dagbladet, October 15, 2009


--- PAGE 9 ---
1027
PEREZ-TRUGLIA: THE EFFECT OF INCOME TRANSPARENCY ON WELL-BEING
VOL. 110 NO. 4
C. Popularity of the Online Tax Lists
We use three sources of data to assess the popularity of the tax lists. The most 
direct evidence comes from a 2007 survey conducted by Synovate, which was repre-
sentative of the population of taxpayers. Around 40 percent of respondents reported 
to have used the online search tools (Skattebetaleren 2008). This behavior may be 
­underreported in surveys because of social desirability bias. Thus, the true fraction 
of Norwegians using these websites may have been even larger than 40 percent.
Web traffic data confirm media claims about the massive popularity of the online 
tax lists, with one website reporting 29.4 million searches in the year after the pub-
lication of the tax records for 2007 (VG 2008). This figure implies 7.47 searches per 
capita among 3,935,000 internet users in Norway in 2007. Even if these statistics are 
inflated due to ­self-reporting by the website owners, this figure excludes traffic from 
other websites and smartphone apps offering access to the tax records, making the 
likely number of searches even higher.
There are also publicly available data from the period when tax records were 
accessible only from the tax agency’s official website. According to the Norway 
Ministry of Finance (2014), 920,896 unique users conducted slightly more than 
17 million searches in 2013.16 In that year, only adults with a valid account could 
log in to the official website to conduct searches. Among the 3,797,822 adults in 
Norway, about 24.25 percent searched for at least one tax record in 2013, and the 
average user made 18.46 searches.
The statistics reported for 2007 and 2013 are not directly comparable to each 
other, because they come from different sources and are probably based on different 
definitions. With that caveat, the number of individuals conducting searches and the 
number of searches per capita decreased from 2007 to 2013. This difference is prob-
ably due to the 2011 requirement that users log in to the official tax agency website 
to search tax records.
We also assess the popularity of the income search tool using data from Google 
Trends, which include the number of times that a keyword is searched in the Google 
search engine.17 For the main search category, skattelister, we include searches 
for the two words used most often to refer to the tax records, “skattelister” and 
“skattelistene,” which both translate literally to “tax list.” For instance, one popular 
website with access to the tax records was www.skattelister.no. As benchmarks, we 
use data on two keywords that are consistently among the most popular keywords 
around the world: “weather” and “YouTube.” As a proxy for the general interest in 
information about taxes, we study the number of searches for “tax.”
Figure 4 shows the popularity of selected keywords in 2010 (the last year when 
users could conduct searches outside of the official website of the tax agency). 
Panel A of Figure 4 shows the results for Norway. Google Trends does not pro-
vide information about the absolute number of searches, so the search totals are 
16 The statistics that have been reported for 2011 and 2012 are similar in magnitude to those for 2013: Bergens 
Tidende (2014) reports over 700,000 unique visitors making over 13 million searches in 2011, and over 900,000 
unique visitors making over 16.5 million searches in 2012.
17 The data can be accessed at: trends.google.com. For a discussion of the advantages and limitations of this type 
of data, see ­Stephens-Davidowitz (2014).


--- PAGE 10 ---
1028
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2020
Panel A. Annual search volumes, Norway versus Sweden
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Google searches (relative to YouTube)
Skattelister
Tax
Weather
YouTube
Panel B. Weekly search volumes, Norway
Norway
Sweden
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Google search index
Jan. 3, 2010
Jan. 31, 2010
Feb. 28, 2010
March 28, 2010
April 25, 2010
May 23, 2010
June 20, 2010
July 18, 2010
Aug. 15, 2010
Sep. 12, 2010
Oct. 10, 2010
Nov. 7, 2010
Dec. 5, 2010
Jan. 2, 2011
Week (start date)
Skattelister
Tax
Weather
YouTube
Skattelister
Weather
YouTube
Tax
Figure 4. Popularity of Online Tax Lists Measured by Google Search Data
Notes: Google Trends data for 2010. Panel A shows the annual number of Google searches for each category of key-
words, relative to the searches for “youtube.” The Skattelister category is comprised by “skattelister+skattelistene,” 
Tax is comprised by “skatt+skatter,” Weather is comprised by “yr+ver” in Norway and “väder” in Sweden. Panel B 
shows the weekly number of searches for each keyword category in Norway, normalized so that total searches sum 
up to 1 in the first week of 2010.


--- PAGE 11 ---
1029
PEREZ-TRUGLIA: THE EFFECT OF INCOME TRANSPARENCY ON WELL-BEING
VOL. 110 NO. 4
­normalized as a fraction of YouTube searches.18 The data suggest a remarkable 
interest in the tax lists: for every five searches for YouTube, there was about one for 
skattelister. Norwegians were more likely to search for the tax records than to search 
for the weather. Searches for the tax lists were roughly three times higher than those 
for taxes, suggesting that a general interest in taxes does not explain the popularity 
of the search tool. As a robustness check, panel B of Figure 4 provides compara-
ble search data for Sweden, where there is no reason for individuals to search for 
skattelister. The volumes of searches for weather, taxes, and YouTube are roughly 
similar between Norway and Sweden, but searches for skattelister are virtually non-
existent in Sweden.
Panel B of Figure 4 shows the distribution of Google searches over the course of 
each week of 2010. Search volumes are normalized so that searches in all categories 
sum up to 1 in the first week of 2010. During most of the year, searches for the tax 
lists remained stable at roughly twice the volume of searches for taxes and at about 
the same as ­weather-related searches. In the third week of October, when data from 
the previous tax calendar year were released, searches for the tax lists increased 
sharply.19 During that week, the number of searches for the tax lists exceeded the 
number of searches for YouTube, suggesting that Norwegians were more interested 
in learning about others’ incomes than in watching videos on YouTube.
D. Uses of the Online Tax Lists
This section presents some evidence that the online tax lists were being used pri-
marily to snoop on social contacts.
Perhaps the best piece of evidence comes from the regulatory change that hap-
pened in 2014, when searches for tax records stopped being anonymous. Specifically, 
any individual could use the same website to identify who searched for their tax 
records. This ­non-anonymity should have discouraged individuals from unsavory 
uses of the tax records, such as snooping, due to the threat of social sanctions. 
Consistent with this hypothesis, the tax agency reported that the number of searches 
dropped by 88 percent after the removal of anonymity. Furthermore, the number of 
users logging in to the system did not decrease much; however, instead of searching 
for others’ incomes, most users logged in to find out who searched for them.20
The aforementioned 2007 Synovate survey offers more direct evidence about the 
uses of the tax lists (Skattebetaleren 2008). The survey asked whether respondents 
searched for specific types of individuals: 61 percent reported searching for close 
relatives, 53 percent for themselves, 42 percent for friends, 26 percent for work 
colleagues, 25 percent for other relatives, 23 percent for neighbors, 18 percent for 
celebrities, and 6 percent for politicians. This pattern is more consistent with snoop-
ing on social contacts than investigating corruption. Indeed, around 77 percent of 
respondents who used the tax records reported using them for curiosity or fun and 
18 As an additional benchmark, the number of searches for YouTube are slightly higher than the combined 
searches for “porn” and its Norwegian translation, “porno.”
19 We find a consistent peak in Google Trends data for other years. This peak is also consistent with the internet 
browsing data discussed below.
20 Some individuals started selling a search service under their names to allow users make anonymous searches, 
although the service has not met popular demand (Kvile 2014).


--- PAGE 12 ---
1030
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2020
only 2 percent for monitoring, such as uncovering tax evasion (Digi 2008). And 
in another survey conducted by Synovate in 2011, only 15 percent of respondents 
believed that the tax lists provided useful information (Sunnmørsposten 2011).
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Share of all visits
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11–100
101+
Number of visits to profle
Panel A. Traffic by profle popularity
Panel B. Traffic by session length
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
Share of all sessions
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
20+
Number of profles visited per session
Figure 5. Internet Browsing Data on the Uses of the Online Tax Lists
Notes: Data from a proprietary panel of internet users, on the visits to a popular website that offered a tool to search 
the Norwegian tax records during 2010. Panel A shows the number of repeated visits to profiles during 2010 (for 
profiles that have been visited at least once). Panel B shows the number of profiles visited per session, for sessions 
with at least one profile visited, corresponding to October 20, 2010 (the release date for the data on incomes corre-
sponding to the 2009 tax calendar). A session begins when the user opens the internet browser and ends when the 
user closes the browser.


--- PAGE 13 ---
1031
PEREZ-TRUGLIA: THE EFFECT OF INCOME TRANSPARENCY ON WELL-BEING
VOL. 110 NO. 4
We also present evidence based on internet browsing behavior from panel data 
covering a significant share of internet users in Norway in 2010. We focus on vis-
itors to a popular website that provided access to the tax records. The data span 
200,000 unique browser sessions with at least one visit to this website. Panel A of 
Figure 5 shows the distribution of total visits by the number of profile visits. The 
results suggest that most traffic is not directed to famous people, such as athletes and 
politicians, because visits to popular profiles (i.e., visited at least 100 times) account 
for less than 3 percent of total traffic. Panel B provides a histogram of the number 
of profiles visited per user session on the day of the release of the 2009 tax calendar 
data.21 The data suggest that ­large-volume users, such as mass marketers, did not 
contribute heavy traffic to these websites. For example, users visiting more than 100 
profiles per session account for only 0.27 percent of total visits. Panel B of Figure 5 
also shows that individuals did not search only for their own incomes, as the typi-
cal session involved searching for several individuals. Even under the conservative 
assumption that all sessions with a single profile visit corresponded to individuals 
searching for their own incomes, this type of searches comprise just 2.62 percent of 
total traffic.
Last, we discuss the possibility that individuals used the online tax lists to learn 
information about salaries for salary negotiations and career choices (Cullen and 
­Pakzad-Hurson 2018). In the previously mentioned survey data, only 26 percent of 
individuals searched for work colleagues in the tax lists, and they may have been snoop-
ing rather than researching. Moreover, due to the nature of the data, the Norwegian tax 
lists have been described as “completely useless” for salary comparisons (NRK 2008). 
As a benchmark, the website of state employees studied in Card et al. (2012) publishes 
information about salaries, with breakdowns by base salary and other forms of com-
pensation. In contrast, the Norwegian tax records reveal the net income of the individ-
ual, which aggregates all salaried income, including bonuses and commissions, and 
­non-salaried income, such as capital gains, ­self-employed income, and social benefits. 
Thus, if you found out that a coworker was listed in the tax records with a higher net 
income than yours, you would not be able to tell whether that coworker has a higher 
salary or whether he or she has additional sources of income.
II.  Econometric Specification and Survey Data
A. Econometric Specification
The baseline specification is the following:
(1)  ​​SWB​i,t​  =  ​α​1​ ⋅ IncomeRan​k​i,t​ + ​α​2​ ⋅ IncomeRan​k​i,t​ ⋅ ​I​ t​ 01−13​ + ​X​i,t​ β + ​δ​t​ + ​ϵ​i,t​​.
Here, ​​SWB​i,t​​ is a measure of subjective ­well-being of individual ​i​ in year ​t​, with 
a higher value denoting higher ­well-being; ​IncomeRan​k​i,t​​ is the position of individ-
ual ​i​ in the national distribution of household income in year ​t​, from 0 (the poor-
est household) to 1 (the richest); ​​I​ t​ 01−13​​ is a dummy variable indicating the period 
21 This is a lower bound on the number of profiles visited per user that day, for instance, because one may have 
visited the website from multiple devices.


--- PAGE 14 ---
1032
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2020
of higher income transparency, equal to 1 if ​t  ∈  ​[2001, 2013]​​ and 0 otherwise; ​​δ​t​​ 
denotes the year effects, ​​X​i,t​​ is a vector with additional control variables, and ​​ϵ​i,t​​ 
denotes the error term.
The coefficient ​​α​1​​ corresponds to the average gradient between ​​SWB​i,t​​ 
and ​IncomeRan​k​i,t​​ in the period from 1985 to 2000. We expect this coefficient to 
be positive, meaning that being richer is associated to higher subjective ­well-being. 
This association may arise purely from intrinsic utility from consumption (e.g., 
richer individuals can afford nicer houses, food, and entertainment), or from a com-
bination of intrinsic utility and income comparisons (e.g., richer individuals get 
higher ­self-esteem and ­social-esteem). The coefficient ​​α​2​​ measures the change in 
the ­happiness-income gradient from 1985–2000 to 2001–2013. Our main hypothe-
sis is that ​​α​2​​​​ is positive: i.e., by facilitating income comparisons, the higher trans-
parency increased the ­happiness-income gradient.
This regression has a ­difference-in-differences interpretation in which 
​​I​ t​ 01−13​​ corresponds to the indicator of ­post-treatment period and ​IncomeRan​k​i,t​​ 
­corresponds to the intensity of treatment (from 0 to 1). An important concern with 
this specification, as in every other ­difference-in-differences design, is the possibil-
ity of differential ­pretrends. In other words, it is possible that the ­happiness-income 
gradient had been gradually increasing even before 2001, yielding ​​α​2​  >  0​, even if 
there was not a discontinuous change in this gradient around 2001. The following 
specification is a traditional way of addressing this concern, by allowing for differ-
ential trends:
(2)	
​​SWB​i,t​  =  ​α​1​ ⋅ IncomeRan​k​i,t​ + ​α​2​ ⋅ IncomeRan​k​i,t​ ⋅ ​I​ t​ 01−13​​
	
​+ γ ⋅ IncomeRan​k​i,t​ ⋅ ​(t − 1985)​ + ​X​i,t​ β + ​δ​t​ + ​ϵ​i,t​​.
In this specification, the coefficient ​​α​1​​ corresponds to the ­happiness-income 
gradient in 1985. The coefficient ​γ​ corresponds to the linear trend for this gradi-
ent from 1985 to 2013. And the coefficient ​​α​2​​ corresponds to the change in the 
­happiness-income gradient around 2001, above and beyond the linear trend.
Another standard method to assess differential ­pre-trends is based on the follow-
ing specification:
(3)	
​​SWB​i,t​  =  ​α​1​ ⋅ IncomeRan​k​i,t​ + ​α​2​ ⋅ IncomeRan​k​i,t​ ⋅ ​I​ t​ 01−13​​
​	
+ ​α​3​ ⋅ IncomeRan​k​i,t​ ⋅ ​I​ t​ 97−00​​ ​+ ​X​i,t​ β + ​δ​t​ + ​ϵ​i,t​​.
Where ​​I​ t​ 97−00​​ is a “fake” treatment indicator that occurs just before the actual 
change in disclosure: i.e., a dummy variable that equals 1 if ​t  ∈  ​[1997, 2000]​​ and 
0 otherwise. In this specification, ​​α​1​​ corresponds to the ­happiness-income gradient 
from 1985–1996, whereas ​​α​2​​ measures the change in that gradient from 1985–1996 
to 2001–2013, and ​​α​3​​ measures the change in the ­happiness-income gradient from 
1985–1996 to 1997–2000. If the ­happiness-income gradient changed sharply around 
2001, we would expect ​​α​2​  >  0​ and ​​α​3​  =  0​. We also present ­event-study graphs, 
which extend this specification by including further interactions with ​​I​ t​ 89−92​​, ​​I​ t​ 93−96​​, 
and so on.


--- PAGE 15 ---
1033
PEREZ-TRUGLIA: THE EFFECT OF INCOME TRANSPARENCY ON WELL-BEING
VOL. 110 NO. 4
If the ­happiness-income gradient increased in 2001, it is possible that this increase 
was caused by another significant change besides transparency that occurred in 
2001 and persisted over the following 12 years. To the best of our knowledge, there 
was no major event around that time that could have had such a large effect on 
the ­happiness-income gradient. We use two additional identification strategies to 
address this concern.
The first strategy consists of a “placebo” analysis that reproduces the regressions 
for another country (i.e., Germany), for which there are similar survey data but no 
change of disclosure around 2001. If the effects in Norway are due to an event that 
also happened in Germany, such as the growth of information technology or the 
­dot-com burst of 2001, then the results in Germany should be similar to the results 
in Norway.
The second strategy consists of a ­triple-differences specification. Ideally, we 
would construct a variable indicating the type of individuals who would be most 
exposed to the effects of online tax lists. This exposure variable would identify 
­individuals who are likely to search for themselves, to be searched for by their 
social contacts, to be aware that their social contacts are searching for them, and so 
on. Then, we could test if the ­well-being effects are stronger for these individuals. 
Unfortunately, we cannot construct this ideal exposure variable, because our survey 
data do not contain information such as whether a respondent visited the tax list 
websites. Instead, we construct our exposure variable based on internet access data.
Let the dummy variable ​HigherInterne​t​i,t​​ take the value 1 if individual ​i​’s observ-
able characteristics in year ​t​, such as the age and education, predict ­above-median 
internet access at home.22 Consider the following ­triple-differences specification:
(4)	
​​SWB​i,t​  =  ​α​1​ ⋅ IncomeRan​k​i,t​ + ​α​2​ ⋅ IncomeRan​k​i,t​ ⋅ ​I​ t​ 01−13​​
​	
+ ​α​3​ ⋅ HigherInterne​t​i,t​ + ​α​4​ ⋅ HigherInterne​t​i,t​ ⋅ ​I​ t​ 01−13​​
​	
+ ​α​5​ ⋅ IncomeRan​k​i,t​ ⋅ HigherInterne​t​i,t​​
​	
+ ​α​6​ ⋅ IncomeRan​k​i,t​ ⋅ HigherInterne​t​i,t​ ⋅ ​I​ t​ 01−13​​
​	
+ ​X​i,t​ β + ​δ​t​ + ​ϵ​i,t​​.
The coefficient ​​α​2​​ is interpreted as the effect of the policy on individuals with 
lower internet access, which we expect to be small or even zero. On the other hand, 
the parameter ​​α​6​​ measures the differential effect of transparency for individuals 
with higher internet access, relative to individuals with lower internet access. Our 
main hypothesis is that ​​α​6​  >  0​: i.e., the change in disclosure had a greater effect on 
individuals with higher internet access.
22 We cannot base the ­triple-differences strategy on a dummy variable for whether the respondent has internet 
access. First of all, the question about internet access was not added until 1999. Most important, the share of 
individuals with internet access has increased dramatically in the sample period. For example, a small share of the 
population had internet access before 1996: according to the World Telecommunication Development Report, only 
6.4 percent of Norwegians had internet access in 1995. As a result, even if we had data on internet access for that 
period, it would make little sense to estimate the ­happiness-income gradient for individuals with internet access.


--- PAGE 16 ---
1034
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2020
B. Survey Data
We use data from the Norwegian Monitor Survey, which was a repeated 
­cross-sectional survey conducted by the market research institute Ipsos MMI. The 
data were collected every other year in 1985–2013 through a ­self-completion ques-
tionnaire sent by mail to a representative sample of Norwegians. This dataset has 
been used to explore the relationship between ­well-being and age (Hellevik 2002), 
between ­well-being and values (Hellevik 2003), and between ­well-being and sus-
tainability (Hellevik 2015).
The final sample used in our regression analysis comprises 48,570 observa-
tions collected in 15 different years, implying an average of 3,238 observations 
per survey year. This sample seems to be representative of the general population 
in some observable characteristics. For example, in the year 2011, 53.0 percent of 
­respondents were women, the median age was 37, and the mean gross household 
income was $129,684 (in 2011 US dollars). In comparison, administrative data from 
Norway for that same year suggest a share of women of 50.5 percent, a median age 
of 39.1, and a mean gross household income of $152,890.23
The survey team did not collect information about the date when each survey was 
completed or mailed back, but they believe that the questionnaires were completed 
between late September and early December.24 Recall that the tax agency releases 
the income data for the previous fiscal year in ­mid-October. In the weeks following 
the data release, traffic to the online tax lists is highest. Thus, a substantial share of 
the respondents may have completed the survey during a time when income trans-
parency was most salient. Our estimated effects of income transparency thus may 
overestimate the effects of income transparency on an average day of the year.  On 
the other hand, a significant share of survey responses for 2001 may have been col-
lected before the change in disclosure took place, thus leading to an ­underestimation 
of the effects of disclosure during the year 2001.
We discuss below the definitions of the main variables.
Subjective ­Well-Being.—The main outcome of interest is subjective ­well-being. 
The Norwegian Monitor Survey includes questions about happiness and life sat-
isfaction, which are the two most widely used measures of subjective ­well-being 
(Easterlin 2004, Kahneman and Deaton 2010). The happiness question is: “Will 
you mostly describe yourself as: Very happy; Quite happy; Not particularly happy; 
Not at all happy.” The life satisfaction question is, “How satisfied are you with your 
life? Very satisfied; Somewhat Satisfied; Neither satisfied nor dissatisfied; Slightly 
dissatisfied; Very dissatisfied.” Happiness and life satisfaction are known as evalua-
tive measures of ­well-being, because answering them requires respondents to think 
about their lives in general.25 It is well established that evaluative measures do not 
23 The data sources are: Central Intelligence Agency’s World Factbook for the female share and median age, and 
the Euromonitor’s World Consumer Income and Expenditure Patterns for the mean household income.
24 According to private communications with the administrators of the survey, the questionnaires were typically 
sent to the respondents in the third week of September (following a national or local election), and the vast majority 
of surveys are sent back before the second week of December.
25 The alternative to evaluative measures are hedonic measures, which are assessed by asking about the presence 
of various emotions in the experience of yesterday (e.g., happiness, sadness, worry), and they often have ­different 


--- PAGE 17 ---
1035
PEREZ-TRUGLIA: THE EFFECT OF INCOME TRANSPARENCY ON WELL-BEING
VOL. 110 NO. 4
vary over the days of the week, are significantly correlated with income, and remain 
correlated with income even at high levels of income (Kahneman and Deaton 2010). 
We use the happiness question in our baseline regressions because it was asked in 
all survey waves from 1985 to 2013, whereas life satisfaction was asked starting in 
1999.26
In the baseline specification, instead of arbitrarily assigning values 1, 2, 3, or 4 
to the four possible answers to the happiness question, we employ the ­Probit-OLS 
method to assign these values (van Praag and ­Ferrer-i-Carbonell 2008). By con-
struction, a higher value denotes higher happiness. We use this method with all 
subjective questions, including life satisfaction. Moreover, to facilitate the inter-
pretation of the regression coefficients, we standardize all subjective outcomes to a 
mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1. Table 1 summarizes the definitions for happi-
ness, life satisfaction, and all other main variables in the analysis. Table 2 provides 
the corresponding descriptive statistics.
Although subjective ­well-being measures have some ­well-documented limita-
tions, a growing body of evidence indicates that they contain significant information 
about the individual’s true ­well-being. Subjective ­well-being is positively correlated 
to objective measures of ­well-being, such as emotional expressions (Sandvik, 
Diener, and Seidlitz 1993), aggregate suicide rates (Di Tella, MacCulloch, and 
Oswald 2003), and activity in the pleasure centers of the brain (Urry et al. 2004). 
Subjective ­well-being also positively correlates with decision utility. For instance, 
Benjamin et al. (2012) conducted a survey in which subjects were shown pairs of 
hypothetical scenarios with trade-offs between two aspects (e.g., higher income ver-
sus longer workdays). They showed that, despite some deviations, most respondents 
choose a scenario that maximizes life satisfaction (see also Benjamin et al. 2014). 
Similarly, ­Perez-Truglia (2015) showed that the expenditure choices predicted by 
life satisfaction data are largely consistent with the actual expenditure behavior of 
the same individuals.
Income Rank.—The variable Income Rank is the position of the respondent in 
the distribution of household income for the current year.27 As is typical in house-
hold surveys, respondents were asked about their annual gross household income 
using bins.28 This question provides no information to rank households within a 
particular income bin and year. To ameliorate this measurement error, we follow the 
standard imputation method from the literature (e.g., Stevenson and Wolfers 2008, 
Kahneman and Deaton 2010), using information on other household characteristics 
correlates than evaluative measures (Deaton and Stone 2013). Unfortunately, our survey data do not include hedonic 
measures.
26 For histograms of the responses to the Happiness and Life Satisfaction questions, see online Appendix 
Figure A.2.
27 While this measure is based on the rank in the national income distribution, individuals probably care the 
most about the comparison to narrower reference groups such as their relatives, friends, neighbors, and coworkers 
(Clark and Senik 2010). We cannot construct measures of Income Rank based on these more specific reference 
groups because we do not know who the respondent’s relatives, friends, or other social contacts are. Due to this 
source of measurement error, our results may ­underestimate the importance of income comparisons. Similarly, 
since the tax records disclosed the wealth of individuals, it is likely that individuals also engaged in wealth com-
parisons. This is another source of measurement error that may lead us to ­underestimate the overall importance of 
(income and wealth) comparisons.
28 We drop 6 percent of the sample corresponding to individuals who did not respond the income question.


--- PAGE 18 ---
1036
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2020
that correlate with income (e.g., education, age, county) to break ties within income 
bins.29
Higher Internet.—The goal of this variable is to split individuals by whether their 
observable characteristics are associated with higher internet access (once the internet 
becomes available). We base this exercise on the dummy variable Internet Access, 
29 The first step of this procedure consists in estimating, for each year, an interval regression of the logarithm 
of income on dummies for gender, education, marital status, age, number of household members, and county. The 
second step consists of using the estimated parameters to predict the logarithm of income for each individual, con-
ditional on belonging to the reported income bracket.  We can then construct Income Rank by ranking individuals 
based on their predicted household income.
Table 1—Data Definitions for the Main Variables from the Norwegian Monitor Survey
Variable name
Definition
Happiness
Based on the following question: “Will you mostly describe yourself as: Very happy; Quite 
happy; Not particularly happy; Not at all happy.” These four categories were assigned values 
using the Probit-OLS method, and then the variable was standardized to have mean 0 and 
standard deviation 1. Higher values denote higher happiness.
Income Rank
Estimated position in the national distribution of household gross income in a given year, from 
0 (lowest income in the country) to 1 (highest). This rank is based on the following ques-
tion: “What would you estimate the household’s total gross income? That is, all total income 
before taxes and deductions: Less than NKR100,000; NKR100,000–199,000; NKR200,000–
299,000; 
NKR300,000–399,000; 
NKR400,000–499,000; 
NKR500,000–599,000; 
NKR600,000–799,000; NKR800,000–999,000; Above NKR1,000,000.” Before 1995, the 
bottom bin was split in two bins (0K–59K and 60K–100K). In 1995, they merged those two 
bins and added the seventh and eighth bins. They added the ninth bin in 1999. The with-
in-bin ranks are imputed using interval regressions as in Stevenson and Wolfers (2008) and 
Kahneman and Deaton (2010).
Life Satisfaction
Based on the following question: “How satisfied are you with your life? Very satisfied; 
Somewhat satisfied; Neither satisfied nor dissatisfied; Slightly dissatisfied; Very dissatisfied.” 
These five categories were assigned values using the Probit-OLS method, and then the vari-
able was standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1. Higher values denote higher 
satisfaction.
Perceived Rank
Based on question: “In comparison to other Norwegians, would you say that your economic 
situation is…? Much worse than average; Slightly worse than average; Average; Slightly bet-
ter than average; Much better than average.” These five categories were assigned values using 
the Probit-OLS method, and then the variable was standardized to have mean 0 and standard 
deviation 1. Higher values denote higher rank.
Income Adequacy
Based on the following question: “How do you feel about your economic situation? Do you 
really need more money than you have to be able to live a satisfying life, do you manage with 
your current income, or would you be able to cope with less if you had to?” The possible 
answers were “I need more money,” “I manage with what I have,” and “I could cope with 
less,” which were assigned values using the Probit-OLS method, and then the variable was 
standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1. Higher values denote higher income 
adequacy.
Internet Access
Dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the individual responds affirmatively to the follow-
ing question: “Do you have Internet access at home?”
I{Higher Internet}
Dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the respondent has above-median predicted inter-
net access in the current year. We estimated an OLS regression of internet access on age, 
age squared, and dummy variables for gender, marital status, education, household size, and 
number of workers in the household using the responses from 2001 (the results from this 
regression are presented in online Appendix Table A.8). Then, for each sample year, we used 
the estimated coefficients to generate predicted internet access and then split the observations 
for that year by the corresponding median value.


--- PAGE 19 ---
1037
PEREZ-TRUGLIA: THE EFFECT OF INCOME TRANSPARENCY ON WELL-BEING
VOL. 110 NO. 4
which equals 1 if the individual has internet access at home and 0 otherwise. Using 
survey responses for 2001, we estimate an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression 
of Internet Access on a series of observable characteristics: age, age squared, and 
dummy variables for gender, education, marital status, household size, and number 
of working household members. Online Appendix Table A.8 reports the results from 
this auxiliary regression. The coefficients suggest that individuals with higher inter-
net access are, on average, more likely to be male, educated, and young, and their 
households are likely to be larger with more working members. These correlations are 
largely consistent with the correlations reported in other studies of internet access and 
internet use in developed countries (File and Ryan 2014). We use the estimated coef-
ficients to predict Internet Access for the entire survey sample. The dummy variable 
I{Higher Internet} equals 1 if the individual’s own predicted internet access exceeds 
the median for the current year.30
Perceived Income Rank and Income Adequacy.—Starting in 1993, the survey 
included a subjective question about ­self-perceived income rank: “In comparison 
to other Norwegians, would you say that your economic situation is …? Much 
worse than average; Slightly worse than average; Average; Slightly better than aver-
age; Much better than average.” We construct the variable Perceived Rank using 
responses to this question, which are coded with the ­Probit-OLS method and then 
standardized. By definition, higher values of this variable denote a higher perceived 
rank. For an additional test of the ­self-perceptions channel, we use data on another 
question that was added to the survey in 1993: “How do you feel about your eco-
nomic situation? Do you really need more money than you have to be able to live 
a satisfying life, do you manage with your current income, or would you be able to 
cope with less if you had to?” The possible answers are “I need more money,” “I 
manage with what I have,” and “I could cope with less.” We construct the variable 
Income Adequacy using the ­Probit-OLS method and then standardize it so that its 
30 This definition guarantees that the distribution of I{Higher Internet} will be stable over time: i.e., in any given 
year, one-half of the sample has I{Higher Internet} = 1 and the other half has I{Higher Internet} = 0.
Table 2—Descriptive Statistics for the Main Variables  
from the Norwegian Monitor Survey
Variable name
Availability
Observations
Mean
(standard deviation)
Happiness
1985–2013
48,570
0.00 (1.00)
Income Rank
1985–2013
48,570
0.50 (0.29)
Life Satisfaction
1999–2013
29,655
0.00 (1.00)
Perceived Rank
1993–2013
38,938
0.00 (1.00)
Income Adequacy
1993–2013
38,950
0.00 (1.00)
Internet Access
1999–2013
29,875
0.76 (0.43)
I{Higher Internet}
1985–2013
48,570
0.50 (0.50)
Notes: See Table 1 for a summary of data definitions for all of the variables listed above. Data 
from the Norwegian Monitor Survey. 


--- PAGE 20 ---
1038
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2020
mean is 0 and standard deviation is 1. Higher values of this variable indicate that 
one’s income is more adequate.31
Control Variables.—We include a standard set of control variables used in studies 
of subjective ­well-being: age, age squared, and dummies for gender, education, mar-
ital status, total number of household members, and number of working household 
members.
German Data.—For the placebo test, we employ data from the German 
­Socio-Economic Panel survey, collected every year from 1985 to 2013.32 The data 
do not include a question on happiness but do include a question on life satisfaction: 
“How satisfied are you with your life, all things considered?” Responses are mea-
sured on a ­11-point scale ranging from “Completely dissatisfied” (0) to “Completely 
satisfied” (10). We code and standardize this outcome using the same method as for 
the Norwegian data. Moreover, we reproduce the same regression specification for 
Germany, including all the same control variables and the same procedure to create 
I{Higher Internet}.33 The final number of observations in Germany (108,209) is 
more than twice that of the Norwegian Monitor Survey (48,570).
III.  Results
A. Effects on the ­Happiness-Income Gradient
Table 3 explores the effects of the change of disclosure on the ­happiness-income 
gradient. The dependent variable in column 1 is Happiness. This column uses 
the simplest specification from equation (1). The estimated coefficient on 
Income Rank (0.311) is positive, precisely estimated, and statistically significant 
( ­p-value ​<​ 0.001). This coefficient implies that during 1985–2000, going from the 
lowest to the highest income rank in Norway was associated with an increase in 
happiness of 0.311 standard deviations. This ­happiness-income gradient is in the 
same order of magnitude as the corresponding gradients reported in other studies.34
Column 1 of Table  3 also reports the coefficient on the interaction between 
Income Rank and I{2001–2013}. This estimated coefficient (0.090) is positive, 
31 For histograms of the responses to the Perceived Income Rank and Income Adequacy questions, see online 
Appendix Figure A.2.
32 To maximize power, we use all the years available in the German data: online Appendix Section A.1 shows 
that the results are robust if we focus on responses on ­odd-numbered years, like in the Norwegian survey.
33 There are a couple of differences between the German and Norwegian surveys. In Germany, we have to 
include dummies for years of education instead of the dummies for levels of educational attainment used in Norway. 
And while in Norway we use Internet Access for the year 2001, that question was not included in Germany in 2001 
so we have to use the responses for the year 2002 instead. Last, we restrict the German data to household heads in 
West Germany.
34 For example, results reported in Table 2 from Stevenson and Wolfers (2008) suggest that, using data for a 
number of countries from the World Values Survey, the ordered probit regression of happiness on the logarithm of 
household income yields a coefficient of 0.244 (SE 0.008). We can provide a direct comparison by estimating the 
same regression with our Norwegian data, which yields a coefficient in the same order of magnitude (0.307; SE 
0.008). This gradient for Norway is higher than, and statistically different from, the corresponding gradient from 
Stevenson and Wolfers (2008). However, we would not expect them to be exactly equal: there is no reason to believe 
that Norway should be representative of the world average; additionally, these differences may be due to differences 
in how income and subjective ­well-being are measured in the two datasets.


--- PAGE 21 ---
1039
PEREZ-TRUGLIA: THE EFFECT OF INCOME TRANSPARENCY ON WELL-BEING
VOL. 110 NO. 4
large, and statistically significant ( ­p-value = 0.005). These findings suggest that 
the ­happiness-income gradient increased substantially (by 29 percent, from 0.311 to 
0.401) from 1985–2000 to 2001–2013.
The first concern is that the coefficient on the interaction of Income Rank with 
I{2001–2013} may not correspond to the 2001 change in disclosure, but instead 
results from a gradual change in this gradient that started years before 2001. To 
address this concern, column 2 of Table 3 shows results for the specification corre-
sponding to equation (2), which includes the interaction between Income Rank and 
the time trend. The coefficient on the interaction between Income Rank and the time 
trend (−0.001) is close to zero and statistically insignificant (­ p-value = 0.877), 
whereas the coefficient on the interaction of Income Rank with I{2001–2013} 
(0.098) remains positive and statistically significant (­ p-value = 0.099). Indeed, we 
cannot reject the null hypothesis that the latter coefficient (0.098) equals the corre-
sponding coefficient of 0.090 from column 1 ( ­p-value = 0.877).35
35 This is an equality test between two coefficients based on the same data but different regressions. To allow 
for a ­nonzero covariance between these two coefficients, we estimate a system of seemingly unrelated regressions. 
In the remainder of the paper, when comparing coefficients from the same data but different regressions, we always 
use this method.
Table 3—Effects on the Gradient between Subjective Well-Being and Income Rank
Happiness Happiness Happiness Happiness
Life 
Satisfaction
Life 
Satisfaction
Life 
Satisfaction
Life 
Satisfaction
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Income Rank
0.311
0.315
0.310
0.331
0.585
0.526
0.539
0.646
(0.028)
(0.040)
(0.032)
(0.040)
(0.056)
(0.085)
(0.018)
(0.025)
Income Rank 
0.090
0.098
0.090
−0.004
0.122
0.050
0.018
−0.049
  × I{2001–2013}​​ 
​(i)​​​
(0.032)
(0.059)
(0.037)
(0.051)
(0.055)
(0.088)
(0.021)
(0.035)
Income Rank × I{2001–2013} 
0.217
0.169
−0.011
  × I{Higher Internet}
(0.073)
(0.131)
(0.046)
Income Rank × (Year − 1985)
−0.001
(0.004)
Income Rank × I{1997–2000}​​ 
​(ii)​​​
0.001
(0.048)
p-value (i) = (ii)
0.043
Country
Norway
Norway
Norway
Norway
Norway
Norway
Germany
Germany
Period
1985–2013 1985–2013 1985–2013 1985–2013 1999–2013 1999–2013 1985–2013 1985–2013
Observations
48,570
48,570
48,570
48,570
29,655
29,655
108,209
108,209
Notes: Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. Each column corresponds to a separate OLS regres-
sion. Happiness and Life Satisfaction are subjective well-being measures normalized to have mean 0 and standard 
deviation of 1, with higher values denoting higher happiness/satisfaction. Income Rank denotes the position of the 
respondent’s household relative to all the other respondents for that year, from 0 to 1. I{2001–2013} takes the value 
1 for 2001–2013. I{1999–2000} takes the value 1 for 1997–2000. I{Higher Internet} is a dummy variable that takes 
the value 1 if the respondent’s predicted Internet Access is above the median value for a given year. All regressions 
control for year dummies, age, age squared, a gender dummy, three education dummies, four dummies for marital 
status, four dummies for household size, and three dummies for number of working household members. Column 4 
also controls for all the additional interactive terms listed in equation (4). Columns 1 through 6 are based on data 
from the Norwegian Monitor Survey, collected every other year in 1985–2013. See Table 1 for a summary of data 
definitions and Table 2 for descriptive statistics. Columns 7 and 8 are based on the same specifications used in col-
umns 1 and 3, only that using data from the German Socio-Economic Panel, collected every year in 1985–2013. 


--- PAGE 22 ---
1040
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2020
In turn, column 3 of Table  3 presents results from the specification corre-
sponding to equation (3), which introduces the interactions of Income Rank with 
I{2001–2013} and I{1997–2000} simultaneously. The coefficient on the interaction 
of Income Rank with I{2001–2013} (0.090) reported in column 3 is statistically 
significant (­ p-value = 0.015) and identical in magnitude to the corresponding coef-
ficient from column 1 (0.090). On the contrary, the coefficient on the interaction of 
Income Rank with I{1997–2000} is close to zero (0.001) and statistically insignif-
icant (­ p-value = 0.975). Furthermore, in column 3 the coefficients on the interac-
tions with I{1997–2000} (0.001) and I{2001–2013} (0.090) are statistically different 
from each other (­ p-value = 0.043).
Panel A of Figure 6 takes the last specification a step further by means of an 
­event-study analysis. This figure shows the evolution of the ­happiness-income 
gradient over the entire 1985–2013 period. Each coefficient denotes the change 
in the ­happiness-income gradient relative to 1997–2000. Thus, the coefficient on 
1997–2000 is normalized to zero.
To attribute the coefficient on the interaction between Income Rank and 
I{2001–2013} to the effect of the disclosure policy, the ­happiness-income gradient 
should be stable during 1985–2000 and then increase after 2001. This is exactly the 
pattern shown in panel A of Figure 6. All ­pre-treatment coefficients are close to zero 
and statistically insignificant (­ p-values of 0.749, 0.737, and 0.612), suggesting that 
the ­happiness-income gradient remained constant during 1985–2000. And the three 
coefficients on the ­post-treatment period are positive and mostly statistically signif-
icant (­ p-values of 0.057, 0.024, and 0.311), suggesting that the ­happiness-income 
gradient increased after 2001 and remained high.
One challenge in interpreting these findings is that the effects may result from 
something other than the transparency change in 2001. To the best of our knowledge, 
there were no events that could explain these patterns, such as major changes to the 
income tax schedule or welfare benefits. To address this concern more directly, we 
use the ­triple-differences design corresponding to equation (4).
The dummy variable I{Higher Internet} equals 1 if the individual’s characteris-
tics, such as being younger and more educated, predict higher internet access. For 
short, we refer to individuals with I{Higher Internet} = 1 as individuals with higher 
internet access. Our ­triple-difference strategy is then based on the assumption that 
the individuals with higher internet access, such as younger and more educated indi-
viduals, are the same types of individuals who are more exposed to the effects of the 
online tax lists.
Several arguments support this assumption. The websites require internet access, 
thus individuals with higher internet access and internet use are more likely to use 
the online tax lists, more aware that they exist, and more aware that their social con-
tacts may be searching for them. Due to homophily, individuals with higher internet 
access have social contacts who also have higher internet access, and thus are more 
likely to be searched in the tax lists by their social contacts. Beyond internet access 
itself, individuals with higher internet access may be the type of individuals who 
care more about income comparisons. For example, Clark and Senik (2010) shows 
that individuals with higher internet access report that income comparisons are more 
important to them. As final evidence consistent with our assumption, the individual 
characteristics associated with higher internet access in our data (disproportionately 


--- PAGE 23 ---
1041
PEREZ-TRUGLIA: THE EFFECT OF INCOME TRANSPARENCY ON WELL-BEING
VOL. 110 NO. 4
younger, more educated, and male) also are associated with ­self-reported use of the 
online tax lists (Skattebetaleren 2008).
Column 4 of Table 3 reports the results from the ­triple-differences specification. 
The evidence indicates that, consistent with the hypothesis that the change in trans-
parency caused the effects, changes in the ­happiness-income gradient were concen-
trated entirely among individuals with higher internet access. The coefficient on 
Panel A. Norway
Panel B. Norway by internet
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Change in
happiness–income gradient
Average effect
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
’85 and ’87
’89 and ’91
’93 and ’95
’97 and ’99
’01 and ’03
’05 and ’07
’09, ’11, and ’13
’85 and ’87
’89 and ’91
’93 and ’95
’97 and ’99
’01 and ’03
’05 and ’07
’09, ’11, and ’13
Higher internet
Panel C. Germany
Panel D. Germany by internet
Change in life
satisfaction–income gradient
Change in life
satisfaction–income gradient
Change in
happiness–income gradient
’85–’88
’89–’92
’93–’96
’97–’00
’01–’04
’05–’08
’09–’13
’85–’88
’89–’92
’93–’96
’97–’00
’01–’04
’05–’08
’09–’13
Lower internet
90% CI
Average effect
Higher internet
Lower internet
90% CI
Figure 6. ­Event-Study Analysis of the Gradient between Subjective ­Well-Being and Income Rank
Notes: Each coefficient corresponds to the change in the gradient between subjective ­well-being and Income Rank 
relative to the period 1997–2000 (by construction, the coefficient for these years is normalized to 0). The green 
vertical line represents the change in disclosure that took place in Norway in 2001. The measure of subjective 
­well-being in Norway is Happiness (panels A and B) and Life Satisfaction in Germany (panels C and D). Both of 
these outcomes are normalized to have mean 0 and standard deviation of 1, with higher values denoting higher hap-
piness/satisfaction. Income Rank denotes the respondent’s household rank for that year, from 0 to 1. All regres-
sions control for year dummies, age, age squared, a gender dummy, three education dummies, four dummies for 
marital status, four dummies for household size, and three dummies for number of working household members. 
Panels A and B are based on 48,570 observations from the Norwegian Monitor Survey, collected every other year 
in 1985–2013: see Table 2 for more detailed data definitions and Table 3 for descriptive statistics. Panels C and 
D are based on 108,209 observations from the German ­Socio-Economic Panel Survey, collected every year in  
1985–2013. Panel B is similar to panel A, only that two regressions are estimated separately for individuals with 
I{Higher Internet} = 1 and I{Higher Internet} = 0. Likewise, panel D is similar to panel C, only that based on two 
separate regressions by I{Higher Internet}.


--- PAGE 24 ---
1042
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2020
the interaction between Income Rank and I{2001–2013} is close to zero (−0.004), 
statistically insignificant, and precisely estimated. This coefficient suggests that the 
­happiness-income gradient did not change in 2001 for individuals with lower inter-
net access. The coefficient on the triple interaction between Income Rank, I{2001–
2013}, and I{Higher Internet} (0.217) is positive, large, and statistically ­significant 
(­ p-value = 0.003). This coefficient indicates that the ­happiness-income gradient 
increased substantially for individuals with higher internet access.36
Panel B of Figure 6 provides the ­event-study equivalent of the ­triple-differences 
identification strategy. The results show that, for individuals with lower internet 
access, the ­happiness-income gradient was stable prior to 2001 and remained the 
same after 2001. For individuals with higher internet access, the ­happiness-income 
gradient was stable prior to 2001, increased after 2001, and remained at a higher 
level for the subsequent 12 years.
As discussed in Section IB, during the 12 years following the change of disclo-
sure, some factors may have increased or decreased the degree of income transpar-
ency. Due to the precision of the estimates, we cannot rule out ups and downs in the 
effects of the policy during the twelve years. However, based on panel B of Figure 6, 
the best guess is that the effects of transparency were stable: we cannot reject the 
null hypothesis that the three ­post-treatment coefficients (0.286, 0.260, and 0.221) 
are equal (­ p-value = 0.757).37
As an additional robustness check, we compare the effects on happiness with the 
effects on life satisfaction. Both outcomes are evaluative measures of ­well-being, 
and they are normally found to be significantly correlated to income. Furthermore, 
despite conceptual differences, happiness and life satisfaction often are treated as 
interchangeable in the literature on subjective ­well-being (Easterlin 2004). We thus 
expect similar effects of transparency across these two outcomes.
Columns 5 and 6 of Table 3 show results using Life Satisfaction as the depen-
dent variable instead of Happiness. We are cautious when interpreting this evidence, 
however. Whereas Happiness has been available since 1983, the Life Satisfaction 
question was not added to the survey until 1999 and thus has only one year of 
­pre-treatment data. Consequently, the standard errors for the Life Satisfaction regres-
sions are almost twice as large as those for the Happiness regressions.
Column 5 of Table 3 presents the results for Life Satisfaction under the baseline 
specification from equation (1). The coefficient on Income Rank (0.585) is large 
and statistically significant ( ­p-value ​<​ 0.001). Indeed, this gradient is larger than 
the corresponding gradient for Happiness (0.311, from column 1). This ­difference 
in gradients is not unreasonable, given that the two questions are supposed to 
measure somewhat different aspects of ­well-being and even use different scales. 
Most important, column 5 of Table 3 shows that the coefficient on the interaction 
between Income Rank and I{2001–2013} (0.122) is positive and statistically signif-
icant (­ p-value = 0.026). These estimates imply that higher income transparency 
increased the life satisfaction–income gradient by 21 percent, from 0.585 to 0.707. 
36 According to column 4 of Table 3, the average effect of the income disclosure on the ­happiness-income gra-
dient is 0.104 (​= − 0.004 + 0.5 ⋅ 0.217​) and statistically significant ( ­p-value = 0.005). As expected, this average 
effect is close to the average effect reported in the baseline specification (0.090, from column 1 of Table 3).
37 See online Appendix Section A.1 for a more detailed discussion, including a more disaggregated ­event-study 
graph.


--- PAGE 25 ---
1043
PEREZ-TRUGLIA: THE EFFECT OF INCOME TRANSPARENCY ON WELL-BEING
VOL. 110 NO. 4
Moreover, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the 21 percent increase in the 
life satisfaction–income gradient equals the corresponding 29 percent increase in 
the happiness–income gradient ( ­p-value = 0.645).
For the sake of completeness, column 6 reports the ­triple-differences specifica-
tion for the Life Satisfaction outcome. The key coefficient on the triple interaction 
between Income Rank, I{2001–2013}, and I{Higher Internet} (0.168) is positive, 
large, and statistically indistinguishable from the corresponding Happiness coef-
ficient (0.217, from column 4). However, due to the lower precision of the Life 
Satisfaction results, the coefficient is statistically insignificant (­ p-value = 0.195).
The next robustness check involves estimating the same regressions in a placebo 
country, Germany, which was not exposed to the Norwegian change in income trans-
parency of 2001. A similar change in the ­happiness-income gradient in Germany 
around 2001 would imply that the effects for Norway must be explained by a factor 
different than the change in disclosure. In turn, finding no effects in Germany would 
rule out any shocks that began in 2001 and were common between Norway and 
Germany, such as the ­dot-com burst or the growth of information technology.
Columns 7 and 8 of Table 3 report the results for Germany, using Life Satisfaction 
as the dependent variable. Column 7 reports the results under the basic spec-
ification from equation (1). The results indicate that, prior to 2001, the gradient 
between income and life satisfaction was similar between Germany and Norway: 
the coefficient on Income Rank (0.539, from column 7) is statistically significant 
(­ p-value ​<​ 0.001) and in the same order of magnitude as the corresponding coef-
ficient for Norway (0.585, from column 5).38 Most important, column 7 indicates 
that, unlike in Norway, there was no significant change in the life ­satisfaction-income 
gradient in Germany around 2001. The coefficient on the interaction of Income Rank 
and I{2001–2013} (0.018) is close to zero, statistically insignificant, and precisely 
estimated. We can reject the null hypothesis that this coefficient for Germany (0.018, 
from column 7) equals the corresponding coefficient estimated in Norway (0.090, 
from column 1), with a ­p-value of 0.030.39 These findings are consistent with panel 
C of Figure 6, which reproduces the ­event-study analysis for Germany (equivalent 
to panel A for Norway). In Norway, the ­happiness-income gradient was stable prior 
to 2001, then increased, and remained at the higher level. On the contrary, the life 
­satisfaction-income gradient in Germany was stable prior to 2001 and remained at 
the same level after 2001.
Column 8 of Table 3 reports the results for Germany under the ­triple-differences 
specification. The coefficient on the triple interaction between Income Rank, 
I{2001–2013}, and I{Higher Internet} (−0.011) is close to zero, statistically insig-
nificant, and precisely estimated. This coefficient indicates that in Germany, there 
was no differential change in the life ­satisfaction-income gradient between individ-
uals with lower versus higher internet access. Indeed, we can confidently reject the 
null hypothesis that the coefficient for Germany (−0.011, from column 8) equals 
the corresponding coefficient for Norway (0.217, from column 4), with a ­p-value of 
38 Modest differences should be expected because these are two different countries and also because the life 
satisfaction and income questions are elicited in different ways.
39 We can also reject the null hypothesis that the coefficient from Germany (0.018, from column 7) is equal to 
the corresponding coefficient reported in column 5 (0.122) for Norway (­ p-value = 0.090).
