

--- PAGE 1 ---
American Economic Review 2021, 111(6): 1880–1917 
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20190098
1880
Can Policy Change Culture? Government Pension Plans 
and Traditional Kinship Practices†
By Natalie Bau*
Policies may change the incentives that allow cultural practices to per-
sist. To test this, I study matrilocality and patrilocality, kinship tradi-
tions that determine daughters’ and sons’ post-marriage residences, 
and thus, which gender lives with and supports parents in their old 
age. Two separate policy experiments in Ghana and Indonesia show 
that pension policies reduce the practice of these traditions. I also 
show that these traditions incentivize parents to invest in the education 
of children who traditionally coreside with them. Consequently, when 
pension plans change cultural practices, they also reduce educational 
investment. This finding further demonstrates that policy can change 
culture. (JEL G51, I20, J15, J16, J32, Z13)
Cultural traditions evolve in response to the conditions in which humans live1 
(Boyd and Richerson 1988) and can facilitate better outcomes by alleviating market 
incompleteness and substituting for laws or policies (Greif 1993). As modernizing 
countries adopt new policies, culture may change. This paper provides new evidence 
on whether policies lead to cultural change by studying traditional, ­ethnicity-level 
practices that determine whether daughters (matrilocal), sons (patrilocal), or neither 
gender (neolocal) live with their parents after marriage. In so doing, it also adds to 
a nascent literature in economics that builds on anthropologists’ recognition of the 
importance of kinship traditions for economic outcomes, particularly in ­low-income 
countries.
I hypothesize that matrilocal and patrilocal practices have two important effects. 
First, they ensure old age support for parents in the absence of pension plans and 
savings mechanisms by designating which children will care for parents in their old 
1 As anthropologists Boyd and Richerson (1988, p. 9) write, “humans adjust their [cultural] phenotypes in 
response to their environments through learning and rational calculation.”
* UCLA, NBER, and CEPR (email: nbau@ucla.edu). Esther Duflo was the coeditor for this article. I acknowl-
edge the support of the CIFAR Azrieli Global Scholars Program. Comments from the editor and two anonymous 
referees greatly improved the paper. I am grateful to Nava Ashraf, David Baqaee, Alberto Bisin, Tim Besley, Pamela 
Campa, Raquel Fernández, Paola Guiliano, Asim Khwaja, Eliana LaFerrara, Adriana Lleras-Muney, Nathan Nunn, 
Manisha Shah, Aloysius Siow, and Alessandra Voena, as well as seminar and conference participants at Harvard-
MIT, Dartmouth, UCLA, CIFAR, NYU, LSE, UCL, Simon Fraser, PSE, Namur, H2D2, SIOE, the Galatina 
Meetings, and UToronto for their helpful comments. Matias Giaccobasso, Eva Ng, Palermo Penano, Maria Sauval, 
and William Stukas provided exceptional research assistance.
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20190098 to visit the article page for additional materials and author  
disclosure statement.


--- PAGE 2 ---
1881
BAU: CAN POLICY CHANGE CULTURE?
VOL. 111 NO. 6
age, providing a form of informal insurance.2 Second, they provide parents with an 
additional incentive to invest in the human capital of these children since they are 
more likely to share in the labor and marriage market returns to their human capital 
investments. This second effect is consistent with a growing literature that suggests 
that imperfectly altruistic parents may invest less than is optimal in their children 
since their children cannot credibly commit to repaying that investment in the future 
(Becker, Murphy, and Spenkuch 2016; Banerjee 2004; Ashraf et al. 2020). Under 
this hypothesis, ­large-scale social programs like pension plans weaken the incen-
tives to practice matrilocality and patrilocality, crowding out a form of informal 
insurance. This also undermines parents’ incentives to invest in the human capital 
of matrilocal (patrilocal) daughters (sons). Thus, observing changes in educational 
investment related to changes in the practices of matrilocality and patrilocality pro-
vides an additional measure of cultural change beyond directly observing changes 
in cultural practices.
In an environment where parents strategically transmit cultural traditions or 
­preferences to their children (as in Bisin and Verdier 2001 and Guttman 2001), the 
hypothesis above generates several testable predictions. First, if matrilocality miti-
gates incomplete contracting problems in educational investment for daughters, edu-
cation rates should be higher for daughters in traditionally matrilocal ethnic groups 
relative to sons as compared to other ethnic groups (and vice versa for tradition-
ally patrilocal sons). Second, the introduction of a pension plan, which reduces the 
need for old age support, should reduce the transmission of matrilocal and patrilocal 
traditions to children, and therefore, the practices of matrilocality and patrilocal-
ity among children who were exposed to the pension plan. As this will exacerbate 
incomplete contracting problems, educational outcomes for daughters from tradi-
tionally matrilocal ethnic groups who were exposed as children should also differ-
entially decline, as should the educational outcomes of traditionally patrilocal sons. 
Third, because social stigma and the cultural traits of an individual’s spouse both 
play a role in whether an individual practices a cultural tradition, the behavior of 
those who are directly affected by the pension plan may also affect the behavior of 
­co-ethnics who do not themselves receive the plan. A cultural externality can there-
fore amplify the pension program’s effects and cause the effects of the share of the 
population exposed to the program on education and the practice of matrilocality/
patrilocality to be ­nonlinear.
I test these predictions in Indonesia and Ghana.3 While the primary analyses are 
in Indonesia, where there are more detailed data on the roll-out of the pension pro-
gram, the analyses from Ghana provide evidence that these results are externally 
valid. As predicted, in Indonesia, females in traditionally matrilocal groups are more 
likely to be enrolled in school relative to their brothers when compared to females 
from ­non-matrilocal groups. In Ghana, the same is true for males from traditionally 
patrilocal ethnic groups.
2 Jayachandran (2015) reviews the literature on patrilocality and its link to old age support by sons, Banerjee 
et al. (2014) show that parents perceive children as an important source of old age support in China, and Jensen 
and Miller (2017) show that living together is important for children providing parents with old age support in India.
3 Unlike most potential settings, Indonesia and Ghana have ­within-country variation in matrilocality/­
patrilocality across ethnic groups. Both have also introduced pension plans in the recent past.


--- PAGE 3 ---
1882
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
Turning to the Indonesian pension program, I provide, to my knowledge, the 
first estimates of the effects of the 1977 introduction of a pension system, Astek, on 
education and cultural practices.4 The primary ­triple-differences analyses exploit 
­ethnicity-level variation in traditional customs, variation in pension plan exposure 
based on birth year, and geographic variation in the intensity of the roll-out. They 
show that the pension program differentially reduced educational investments in 
females from traditionally matrilocal ethnic groups. These women were also less 
likely to practice matrilocality as adults. In contrast, the plan had no differential 
effects on traditionally matrilocal males’ education. In line with the existence of 
cultural externalities, the effects of the intensity of the pension’s roll-out on both 
the practice of matrilocality and education are ­nonlinear, with discontinuously large 
effects in the top tercile of treated provinces.
In Ghana, I exploit the timing of the introduction of a 1972 pension policy to 
provide estimates of this policy’s effect on education and cultural practices. Males 
from traditionally patrilocal ethnic groups who were exposed to the program for 
longer received less education than ­nontraditionally patrilocal males and were less 
likely to practice patrilocality as adults. Thus, the results from Indonesia replicate in 
a very different setting.
Beyond examining whether policies can lead to cultural change, this paper pro-
vides evidence on the role of cultural traditions in the provision of old age support 
and how they interact with formal old age support policies. Declines in fertility 
and increases in longevity have led to rapidly aging populations throughout the 
world (Lee, Mason, and Cotlear 2010). In over one-half of the world’s countries, 
the increase in the population in the 60+ category dominates increases in younger 
groups, and by 2050, the percent of the population that is 65+ is expected to exceed 
15 ­percent in 42 countries with GDP ­per capita below US$10,000 in 2005 (Lee, 
Mason, and Cotlear 2010). The World Bank (2020) writes, “The most dramatic 
aging worldwide is projected to take place in low and ­middle-income countries.” To 
address this challenge, the World Bank has been involved in pension reforms in over 
90 countries (World Bank 2020). A better understanding of how old age support is 
informally provided and of the consequences of formal old age support policies is 
therefore crucial for the design of these policies throughout the world.
This paper contributes to several literatures. It builds on the literature on the evo-
lution of cultural practices and attitudes (Giuliano and Nunn forthcoming, Lowes 
et al. 2017, Bidner and Francois 2011, Anderson and Bidner 2015). Most empirical 
papers in this literature study the effects of large shocks that likely affected culture 
along many dimensions. For example, Campa and Serafinelli (2019) and Alesina 
and ­Fuchs-Schündeln (2007) study the effects of state socialism on attitudes. Other 
papers study the effect of different historical empires (Peisakhin 2010, Becker et al. 
2015, Grosfeld and Zhuravskaya 2015, Wysokinskya 2015). In contrast, this paper 
studies relatively small policy changes5 that come with modernization and shows 
that these policies can lead to cultural change.
4 Sudomo (1985), Muliati (2013), and Perusahan Umum Asuransi Sosial Tenaga Kerja (1985) discuss this 
policy in more detail.
5 Several other papers document that policies can affect culture and/or attitudes. Gruber and Hungerman (2007) 
show that the New Deal’s “modernization” policies crowded out the informal social safety net of ­church-based 
­charitable spending. Bastian (2020) shows that the introduction of the EITC contributed to a rise in working 


--- PAGE 4 ---
1883
BAU: CAN POLICY CHANGE CULTURE?
VOL. 111 NO. 6
Additionally, this paper contributes to a growing literature on the importance 
of family ties and kinship practices for economic outcomes (Alesina and Giuliano 
2011, 2013; Alesina et al. 2015; Enke 2019; La Ferrara 2007; Lowes 2016; Schulz 
2018; Akbari, ­Bahrami-Rad, and Kimbrough 2019; Moscona, Nunn, and Robinson 
2017). While anthropologists have long believed that these ­kinship traditions are 
an important driver of outcomes in ­low-income countries, this understanding is 
relatively new in economics. I contribute to this literature by ­showing how a spe-
cific set of kinship practices, matrilocality and patrilocality, affect human capital 
investment.6
This paper also adds to an emerging literature on the importance of culture for 
determining the effects of different policies (Ashraf et al. 2020, World Bank 2015, 
Ebenstein 2014, La Ferrara and Milazzo 2017, Schoellman and Tertilt 2006, Tertilt 
2005), as well as the growing literature that examines the effects of ­gender-related 
cultural traditions (Fernández 2007, 2011; Fernández and Fogli 2009; Tertilt 2006; 
Alesina, Giuliano, and Nunn 2013; Giuliano 2015; Alesina, Brioschi, and La Ferrara 
forthcoming; Corno, Hildebrandt, and Voena 2020; Corno and Voena 2015; Gneezy, 
Leonard, and List 2009; Becker 2018; Jayachandran and Pande 2017).
Finally, this paper contributes to a large literature on informal insurance networks 
(examples include Munshi and Rosenzweig 2016 and Mazzocco and Saini 2012 on 
the role of caste networks; Caldwell, Reddy, and Caldwell 1986 on the role of fertil-
ity; and Rosenzweig and Stark 1989 on exogamy) and how they interact with mod-
ernizing environments (e.g., Meghir et al. forthcoming on the interaction between 
village ­risk-sharing and migration and Munshi and Rosenzweig 2006 on the inter-
action of caste networks with increasing returns to English language education). I 
contribute to this rich literature by providing evidence on how cultural traditions can 
play a role in facilitating transfers between children and parents and documenting 
how informal arrangements respond to the growth of formal social insurance.
The paper is organized as follows. Section I provides an overview of patrilocal 
and matrilocal traditions. Section II outlines a brief conceptual framework to guide 
the empirical analysis. Section III reports estimates of the effect of traditional matri-
locality and patrilocality on the gender gap in education in Indonesia and Ghana. 
Section IV turns to the primary analysis of the paper, testing whether the introduc-
tion of the pension plan differentially reduced female education and the transmis-
sion of matrilocality among traditionally matrilocal groups in Indonesia. Section V 
replicates the key findings for patrilocality in Ghana. Section VI reports additional 
findings, and Section VII concludes.
­mothers in the United States, and Beaman et al. (2009) provide evidence that female leadership quotas change voter 
attitudes in India.
6 Two related papers study the relationship between kinship traditions and human capital investment in Indonesia. 
Levine and Kavane (2003) use the Indonesia Family Life Survey dataset to study the relationship between patrilo-
cality (as determined by an expert respondent at the ­village-level) and gender biased investment in Indonesia and 
do not find a strong relationship. Rammohan and Robertson (2012) find a strong negative relationship between 
ex post migration and female education in the IFLS. The analysis on the link between kinship traditions and human 
capital in this paper differs from these papers both by using a different, larger dataset and a different definition of 
matrilocality drawn from the anthropological literature, and also by providing symmetric results on patrilocality in 
Ghana. By exploiting exogenous variation from pension plan introductions to show that reducing the practice of 
matrilocality and patrilocality reduces the education of the targeted gender, this paper also provides more evidence 
that the link between these kinship traditions and education is causal.


--- PAGE 5 ---
1884
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
I.  Patrilocal and Matrilocal Customs
In this section, I first document how I classify ethnic groups as matrilocal and 
patrilocal and describe the variation in these measures. Then, to provide context for 
the analyses in this paper and identify potential sources of bias, I discuss theories 
on the origins of matrilocality and patrilocality from the anthropological literature. 
Finally, to validate the anthropological data, I show that, even in recent datasets, 
the assignment of these ­ethnicity-level traditions predicts matrilocal and patrilocal 
practices.
A. Variation in Matrilocality and Patrilocality
My analysis requires the measurement of the traditional ­post-marriage residency 
practices of different ethnic groups. To do so, I use data from the Ethnographic 
Atlas (Murdock 1967), which codes ethnic groups’ traditional, ­pre-modernization 
cultural practices.7 To arrive at ­ethnicity-level measures of traditional matrilocal-
ity and patrilocality in the Indonesian and Ghanaian censuses, I follow methods 
developed by Ashraf et al. (2020) and Alesina, Giuliano, and Nunn (2013). I use 
the Ethnologue (Gordon 2009) to match the ethnicity or language data collected 
by the censuses with the ­ethnicity-level data on cultural practices available in the 
Ethnographic Atlas. Because there are more disaggregated ethnic groups in the 
censuses than the Ethnographic Atlas, multiple ethnic groups in a census may be 
matched to one ethnic group in the Ethnographic Atlas.
In Indonesia, I match 812 of the 827 languages in the 2010 Census to 45 groups in 
the Ethnographic Atlas with information on ­post-marriage residence (matrilocality, 
neolocality, or patrilocality). I focus on variation between traditional matrilocality 
and patrilocality/neolocality, since groups that primarily practice patrilocality or 
neolocality in Indonesia often practice the other as a secondary practice (LeBar 
1972).8 In Ghana, I successfully match 53 of the 57 ethnic groups in the 2000 Census 
to 24 groups with information on ­post-marriage residence in the Ethnographic Atlas. 
In an alternative match using Gil (1964) and Asante and Mazama (2009), the major-
ity of the groups coded as matrilocal in this match are neolocal. Therefore, I focus 
on the margin between patrilocality and neolocality/matrilocality.9
7 Of the 1,235 ethnic groups for whom data on ­ethnicity-level practices are available in the Ethnographic Atlas, 
880 are traditionally patrilocal (71 percent), 155 are traditionally neolocal (13 percent), and 200 are traditionally 
matrilocal (16 percent).
8 This choice follows from two additional pieces of information. The first piece of information comes from the 
Ethnographic Atlas, which reports both the primary ­post-marriage residential practice, which is what is used for 
the coding in this paper, and the alternative practice. According to the Ethnographic Atlas, less than 1 percent of 
individuals who report matrilocality as their primary practice have an alternative practice. In contrast, among those 
who report patrilocality as their primary form, 82 percent report neolocality as an alternative. The second piece of 
information comes from a secondary match that I created of large ethnic groups in the 2010 Indonesia Census to 
ethnic traditions using LeBar (1972) and Strouthes (1993). In this match, less than one-half of the individuals who 
were coded as patrilocal according to the Ethnographic Atlas are still coded as patrilocal. However, the coding of 
matrilocality was very stable across concordances. Ninety-nine percent of individuals coded as matrilocal according 
to the Ethnographic Atlas are also coded as matrilocal according to the alternative concordance.
9 If a group is primarily patrilocal according to the Ethnographic Atlas, the second match agrees 76 percent of 
the time. This second match, however, never codes groups as matrilocal. The majority of the groups that are matri-
local in the match from the Ethnographic Atlas (92 percent) are coded as neolocal in this match.


--- PAGE 6 ---
1885
BAU: CAN POLICY CHANGE CULTURE?
VOL. 111 NO. 6
Using this assignment of matrilocality and patrilocality, I map the geographic 
variation in these practices. Figure 1 reports the ­district-level percent of individuals 
in the census who belong to traditionally matrilocal (in Indonesia) and patrilocal (in 
Ghana) ethnic groups. While these traditions are not uniformly distributed in either 
Figure 1. Distribution of Matrilocal Groups in Indonesia and Patrilocal Groups in Ghana
Note: The figure reports the percent of the population in a district that traditionally practices matrilocality in 
Indonesia (top) and traditionally practices patrilocality in Ghana (bottom).
Sources: Population shares were constructed by matching the Indonesia 2010 Census and the Ghana 2000 Census 
(data provided by Minnesota Population Center 2011) to data on ­ethnicity-level traditions from Murdock (1967).
Ghana
4.4–21.9%
22–39.3%
39.4–60%
60.1–84.7%
84.8–99.1%
Share patrilocal
Indonesia
0–6.1%
6.2–22%
22.1–47.9%
48–75.7%
75.8–99.1%
Share matrilocal
N
N


--- PAGE 7 ---
1886
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
country, there is still a great deal of geographic variation in matrilocal and patrilocal 
traditions.
B. Origins of Matrilocality and Patrilocality
Theories in anthropology on the origins of matrilocality and patrilocality shed 
light on other cultural traits that could be correlated with these traditions. One the-
ory argues that early hunter gatherer societies were typically matrilineal (lineage 
and inheritance pass through the mother’s line, and a son usually inherits from his 
maternal uncle) because sexual promiscuity made it difficult to identify a child’s 
father (Engels 1942). Matrilocality and matrilineality may in turn be correlated 
since matrilocality allows children to grow up with their mother’s family, which is 
their lineage group under matrilineality.10
An alternative theory is that matrilineality tends to occur in horticultural soci-
eties where women often have a more dominant role in agriculture (Jones 2011). 
Relatedly, Holden and Mace (2003) argue that patrilineality (and therefore, patrilo-
cality) may be more likely to evolve in pastoral societies with access to cattle, where 
men play a larger role in agricultural production.
Finally, some anthropologists have also linked matrilineality to dowry and patri-
lineality to bride price. For example, Vroklage (1952) suggests that bride price, a 
payment from the family of the husband to the family of the bride at the time of 
marriage, compensates the family of the bride for taking the daughter from their 
lineage group.
Using data from the Ethnographic Atlas, I examine whether across- and 
­within-country correlations in traditional practices are consistent with these the-
ories. I also test whether matrilocality and patrilocality are correlated with other 
characteristics believed to be related to ­gender-biased behavior. Online Appendix 
Table A1 estimates the global correlation between ­ethnicity-level matrilocality and 
patrilocality and aboriginal plow use, polygamy, bride price, ­male-dominated agri-
culture, and matrilineality. Consistent with the anthropological literature, patrilo-
cality and matrilocality are strongly correlated with bride price and matrilineality 
across ethnic groups.
However, the correlations between these traditions and matrilocality and patrilo-
cality may be weaker within countries, where the traditional practices of the popu-
lations are more homogeneous. Online Appendix Table A2 reports the correlations 
between matrilocality and other traditions within Indonesia and between patrilo-
cality and other traditions within Ghana.11 I run these regressions at the individual 
instead of the ethnic group level to allow larger ethnic groups to have more weight, 
as they do in my main analysis, and cluster the standard errors at the Ethnographic 
Atlas ­ethnicity-level. As the table shows, there is no variation in Ghana in polygamy 
(all groups are historically polygamous), ­male-dominated agriculture (no ethnic 
groups have exclusively male agriculture), and aboriginal plow use (no groups had 
10 Matrilineality doesn’t typically imply women inherit. In Status of Women in ­Pre-Industrial Societies, Whyte 
(1978, p. 7) notes that in matrilineal societies, “It is perfectly possible for the position of women to be as low as the 
greatest misogynist would desire.”
11 To account for the fact that much of the variation in cultural traditions in Indonesia is across islands, I further 
control for province fixed effects in Indonesia.


--- PAGE 8 ---
1887
BAU: CAN POLICY CHANGE CULTURE?
VOL. 111 NO. 6
the plow). Additionally, in Ghana, bride price and matrilineality do not correlate 
with patrilocality. In Indonesia, bride price and ­male-dominated agriculture are not 
correlated with matrilocality, while aboriginal plow use, polygamy, and matrilineal-
ity are. Altogether, though patrilocality and matrilocality are correlated with other 
cultural traditions in Indonesia, these relationships are not systematic across both 
countries.12 Nonetheless, throughout this paper, I control for a set of cultural tra-
ditions that have been linked with ­gender-biased behavior consisting of aboriginal 
plow use, bride price, ­male-dominated agriculture, and polygamy.
C. Modern Practice of Matrilocality and Patrilocality
I now validate my ­ethnicity-level measures of matrilocality and patrilocality from 
the Ethnographic Atlas by testing whether they predict modern behavior. I use the 
2000 Ghana Census, the 2010 Indonesia Census,13 and the 2000 and 2007 rounds of 
the Indonesia Family Life Survey or IFLS (Strauss et al. 2004, 2009), which provide 
more detailed data on matrilocal practices. In the censuses, I code a household as 
practicing matrilocality (patrilocality) if a married daughter (son) lives in the same 
household as her parents. This is a ­lower-bound measure of the prevalence of these 
traditions. It does not capture cases where a child lives in the same compound or the 
same village as a parent but does not live in the same census household.14 Nor does 
it capture cases where matrilocality and patrilocality are not possible because there 
are no living parents or married children.
Columns 1–3 and 6–8 of Table 1 report the coefficients from regressions of the 
practice of matrilocality and patrilocality in the censuses on indicator variables for 
whether the household head belongs to a traditionally matrilocal or patrilocal eth-
nicity. In the case of Indonesia, I further include province fixed effects to account 
for important geographic variation across islands in traditional practices. In addition 
to the baseline specifications (columns 1 and 6), columns 2 and 7 control for other 
cultural traits, and columns 3 and 8 restrict the sample to individuals who live out-
side their ethnic homelands.15 This restriction follows from the “epidemiological 
approach” (Fernández and Fogli 2006), which analyzes the effect of the cultural 
background of different migrants to the same destination on their behavior. By com-
paring migrants in the same destination from different cultural backgrounds, this 
approach separates the effect of culture from other confounders and shows that cul-
ture has persistent effects.
12 Matrilocality and patrilocality may still be associated with unobserved gender-biased attitudes. While research 
in this area is limited, Alesina, Brioschi, and La Ferrara (forthcoming) provide evidence that there is no correlation 
between patrilocality and domestic violence or attitudes toward violence against women in 18 ­sub-Saharan African 
countries.
13 Both censuses are provided by the Minnesota Population Center (2011).
14 Beaman and Dillon (2012) show that determining the exact boundaries of a household in ­low-income coun-
tries is difficult, and the choice of boundaries may affect the results of economic analysis.
15 To determine if an individual lives outside his or her ethnic homeland, I match the ethnic groups in the data 
to ­ethnicity-level GIS shape files of the boundaries of ethnic/linguistic homelands from the 16th edition of the 
Ethnologue (Gordon 2009) for Indonesia and the Murdock map for Africa in Ghana (Murdock 1967). Ethnicities 
whose homelands in Ghana could not be identified with the Murdock map were matched to homelands based on the 
Ethnologue 16. In the ­non-homeland sample, any individual living in a district that is identified as being part of his 
or her ethnic homeland is dropped from the sample. I am grateful to Nathan Nunn for sharing these data with me.


--- PAGE 9 ---
1888
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
In Indonesia, the baseline specification indicates that belonging to a matrilocal 
ethnicity increases the likelihood a household practices matrilocality by 3.2 percent-
age points (39 percent). In Ghana, belonging to a patrilocal ethnicity increases the 
likelihood a household practices patrilocality by 3.2 percentage points (44 percent). 
Columns 3 and 8 of Table 1 also indicate that historical traditions are predictive of 
­modern-day practices, even among individuals who no longer live in their ethnic 
homeland.
I next replicate these tests of the predictive power of matrilocal traditions using 
the IFLS data. Unlike the censuses, the IFLS asks respondents whether each of their 
biological parents is alive, lives with them, or lives with a sister. I restrict my sam-
ple to daughters who are married, have a living parent, and are aged 25–45. These 
restrictions ensure that I examine an adult sample that can practice matrilocality and 
is unlikely to be affected by differential mortality. The respondent is coded as prac-
ticing matrilocality if at least one parent lives with either the respondent or her sister. 
Because an observation is now an individual instead of a household, I further control 
for age fixed effects. The results from the IFLS suggest that the census measure of 
Table 1—Association between Cultural Traditions and Current Practices
Indonesia 2010 Census
Indonesia Family 
Life Survey
Ghana 2000 Census
Household practices  
matrilocality
Respondent practices 
matrilocality
Household practices 
patrilocality
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Matrilocal 
  ethnicity
0.032
0.023
0.020
0.061
0.064
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.003)
(0.019)
(0.029)
[0.020]
[0.292]
Patrilocal  
  ethnicity
0.032
0.033
0.020
(0.011)
(0.016)
(0.009)
­Non-homeland  
  sample
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
Y
Province FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
Ethnicity tradition  
  controls
N
Y
N
N
Y
N
Y
N
Muslim control
N
Y
N
N
Y
N
Y
N
Age FE
N
N
N
Y
Y
N
N
N
Mean dep. var.
0.082
0.082
0.065
0.200
0.200
0.071
0.071
0.066
Observations
6,067,884
6,063,227
1,485,992
8,776
8,772
298,245
298,245
154,292
Clusters
45
45
45
13
13
24
24
24
Adjusted ​R​ 2​
0.009
0.010
0.009
0.027
0.027
0.004
0.005
0.002
Notes: For the census datasets, this table regresses an indicator variable for whether a household practices 
­matrilocality (a married daughter lives in the same household as her parents) or patrilocality (a married son lives 
in the same household as his parents) on indicator variables for whether the household head belongs to a tradition-
ally matrilocal or patrilocal ethnicity. An observation is then a household. For the Indonesia Family Life Survey 
(rounds 3 and 4), this table regresses an indicator variable equal to 1 if a female, married respondent between the 
ages of 25 and 45 with at least one living parent reports one or both of her biological parents live with her or her sis-
ter on an indicator variable for whether the respondent belongs to a matrilocal ethnic group. Ethnicity controls con-
sist of indicator variables for polygamy, aboriginal plow use, ­male-dominated agriculture, and bride price customs, 
and indicator variables for cases where information on these customs is missing. Standard errors are clustered at 
the Ethnographic Atlas ethnicity level. Due to the small number of clusters in the IFLS, wild bootstrapped ­p-values 
appear in the brackets for these regressions.
Sources: Data sources consist of the Indonesia 2010 Census and the Ghana 2000 Census (Minnesota Population 
Center 2011), rounds 3 and 4 of the Indonesia Family Life Survey (Strauss et al. 2004, 2009), and information on 
­ethnicity-level traditions and homelands from Murdock (1967) and Gordon (2009)


--- PAGE 10 ---
1889
BAU: CAN POLICY CHANGE CULTURE?
VOL. 111 NO. 6
the pervasiveness of matrilocality is a lower bound. Compared to the 8 percent of 
households in the census, 20 percent of married females in the IFLS are coded as 
practicing matrilocality. Columns 3 and 4 show that belonging to a matrilocal eth-
nicity is associated with a 6 percentage point increase in practicing matrilocality 
(30 percent).16
II.  Conceptual Framework
This section provides a brief conceptual framework guided by the theoretical 
work of Banerjee (2004) and Bisin and Verdier (2001) to generate predictions for 
the empirical analysis. Online Appendix Section A shows that these predictions can 
be produced by an equilibrium model of cultural transmission and human capital 
investment. An imperfectly altruistic parent can be thought of as choosing whether 
to attempt to transmit her ethnic group’s cultural tradition (matrilocality or patrilo-
cality) to her child in line with Bisin and Verdier (2001). If a parent transmits the cul-
tural tradition, the child will have a positive probability of practicing that tradition as 
adult.17 However, that positive probability will also depend on how widespread the 
tradition is among ­co-ethnics, both because the practice of the tradition is enforced 
if deviating leads to social stigma and because the child’s spouse must also agree 
to practice the tradition.18 Transmitting cultural traditions may be costly because it 
leads children to forgo profitable migration opportunities, because the parent must 
practice matrilocality or patrilocality to model the behavior, or because it has actual 
financial costs. However, there are also benefits to transmitting a cultural tradition. If 
a parent transmits the tradition, it increases the likelihood that a child of the targeted 
gender stays with the parent and provides her with old age support, allowing the 
parent to informally save in a context with little access to formal savings technol-
ogies. Additionally, as the child will be able to provide more old age support if she 
is more educated due to marriage market19 or labor market returns,20 transmitting 
the tradition allows the parent to partake in the returns to the child’s education. As 
16 Given that I will show that the introduction of a pension plan reduces these practices, cultural traditions likely 
had an even stronger differential effect on the practices of matrilocality and patrilocality before the pension plan 
was introduced. My estimates, which I will discuss in detail in Section IV, indicate that the pension plan differ-
entially reduced the likelihood of practicing matrilocality among traditionally matrilocal females by 7 percentage 
points. Taking the 6 percentage point difference from the IFLS as the modern effect of traditional matrilocality, this 
indicates that prior to the plan, traditionally matrilocal females were at least 13 percentage points more likely to 
practice matrilocality.
17 Online Appendix Table A3 provides evidence from the panel IFLS that matrilocal practices are indeed trans-
mitted across generations. Female descendants of households that practiced matrilocality in the first round of the 
IFLS in 1993 (but themselves were not observed practicing matrilocality in 1993) with at least one living parent 
were almost 50 percentage points more likely to be observed practicing matrilocality in 2000 and 25 percentage 
points more likely to be observed practicing it in 2007.
18 As noted by anthropologists, ­coresidence traditions require “interlocking and coordinated social exchange” 
(Jordan et al. 2009). This reasoning assumes that individuals marry within their own ethnic group, and the data are 
consistent with this assumption. In the Indonesia 2010 Census, less than 1 percent of household heads have a spouse 
from an ethnicity with a different ­post-marriage residency practice. In the Ghana 2010 Census, only 13.8 ­percent of 
married household heads have a spouse from an ethnicity with a different ­post-marriage residency practice.
19 Ashraf et al. (2020) show that marriage market matching in Indonesia is highly assortative in education. Thus, 
parents of more educated matrilocal daughters in Indonesia benefit from both the labor market returns to education 
and the increased quality/income of the daughter’s spouse.
20 More than 50 percent of women aged 25–45 in the 2010 Indonesian Census are employed, and Mincerian 
regressions reported in online Appendix Table A21 show that greater female education is associated with a greater 
chance of employment, higher wages, and greater household wealth.


--- PAGE 11 ---
1890
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
Banerjee (2004) shows, cultural traditions or social norms that increase a parent’s 
ability to capture the returns to education mitigate incomplete contracting problems 
that would otherwise lead to inefficiently low educational investment when parents 
are imperfectly altruistic. Thus, matrilocality incentivizes educational investment in 
daughters and patrilocality incentivizes it in sons, producing the conceptual frame-
work’s first testable prediction. 
PREDICTION 1: Education will be higher for daughters relative to sons for tra-
ditionally matrilocal ethnic groups relative to other ethnic groups. Education will 
be higher for sons relative to daughters for traditionally patrilocal ethnic groups 
relative to other ethnic groups. 
Consider what happens when the government introduces a pension account that 
a parent pays into when she is young and receives as a ­lump sum when she is old. 
This formal savings technology makes old age support from a child less valuable, 
and as a result, the parent is less likely to transmit her ethnic group’s cultural tra-
dition to her child. Thus, a child who is exposed to the pension program becomes 
less likely to practice matrilocality/patrilocality as an adult. As in Banerjee (2004), 
the removal of the cultural tradition exacerbates incomplete contracting problems 
between the parent and children whose genders would otherwise be targeted by the 
prevalent cultural tradition. 
PREDICTION 2: Daughters from traditionally matrilocal ethnic groups who were 
exposed to the pension plan will have less education and be less likely to practice 
matrilocality as adults. Sons from traditionally patrilocal ethnic groups who were 
exposed to the pension plan will have less education and be less likely to practice 
patrilocality as adults. 
An important caveat to Predictions 1 and 2 is that they rely on the assumption that 
educating a child does not increase the probability that she migrates (and reneges 
on the tradition) by enough to eliminate parents’ old age support motive to educate 
the child. In Section VI, I provide descriptive evidence that this is the case for tradi-
tionally matrilocal females in Indonesia and traditionally patrilocal males in Ghana. 
Consistent with the idea that a parent is more likely to educate a child to whom 
they also transmit the cultural tradition, education (for secondary and university 
education in Indonesia and for primary schooling in Ghana) is positively associated 
with ­coresiding with parents as an adult for these samples. However, in other con-
texts, like the Indian context studied by Jensen and Miller (2017), where education 
strongly increases the likelihood of migration, cultural traditions of ­coresidence and 
old age support may lead parents to strategically decrease the education of children 
they expect to care for them in their old age. Thus, in some cases, by reducing the 
need for old age support, pension programs could have positive rather than negative 
effects on education.
The existence of pension programs may even affect parents and children in house-
holds without access to a pension through a cultural externality. If enough adults stop 
transmitting matrilocality/patrilocality to their children due to the ­program, failing 
to follow the practice will be less stigmatized, and following the practice will be 


--- PAGE 12 ---
1891
BAU: CAN POLICY CHANGE CULTURE?
VOL. 111 NO. 6
more likely to create conflicts between spouses. Even a child whose parents trans-
mit the tradition will be less likely to practice it as an adult, and parents who do not 
receive the plan themselves may rationally cease to transmit the practice. 
PREDICTION 3: The effect of the share of the traditionally matrilocal or patrilocal 
population exposed to the pension plan on education and the practice of the cultural 
tradition may be ­nonlinear if there are cultural spillovers onto households that do 
not receive the plan.
III.  Matrilocality, Patrilocality, and the Gender Gap
In this section, I test the first prediction from the conceptual framework: that 
female education rates will be higher relative to male education rates for tradition-
ally matrilocal ethnic groups and vice versa for patrilocal ethnic groups. I start by 
evaluating how the gender gap in enrollment between siblings varies with cultural 
traditions. To estimate the association between patrilocality and matrilocality and 
­within-household differences in school enrollment in Indonesia and Ghana, I use 
the 2010 Census data in Indonesia and the 2000 Census data in Ghana to estimate
(1)	
​​enroll​ije​  =  ​β​1​ ​I​ i​ Gender​ + ​β​2​ ​I​ i​ Gender​ × ​I​ e​ 
Tradition​ + Γ ​X​ie​ + H​H​j​ + ​ε​ije​,​
where ​i​ denotes a child of the household head between the ages of 5 and 22, ​e​ 
denotes an ethnic group, ​j​ denotes a household, and ​​enroll​ije​​ is an indicator variable 
equal to 1 if a child is enrolled in school and 0 otherwise; ​​I​ i​ Gender​​ is an indicator 
variable for the relevant gender (female in Indonesia and male in Ghana), ​​I​ e​ 
Tradition​​ 
is an ­ethnicity-specific indicator variable for an ethnic group’s traditional practice 
(matrilocality in Indonesia and patrilocality in Ghana), and ​H​H​j​​ is a household fixed 
effect. I focus on the sample aged 5–22 since this group is ­school-aged, includ-
ing college. The term ​​X​ie​​ contains ­child-specific controls and age fixed effects, and 
depending on the specification, includes controls for Muslim, parental educational 
and socioeconomic status,21 controls for geographic region (province indicator vari-
ables in Indonesia and district indicator variables in Ghana), a control for whether 
the household head is male, and indicators for aboriginal plow use, bride price cus-
toms, ­male-dominated agriculture, and polygamy traditions, all interacted with child 
gender. The variable ​​β​2​​, the relative effect on enrollment of being a traditionally 
matrilocal female or patrilocal male, is the coefficient of interest, and the conceptual 
framework predicts that ​​β​2​  >  0​.
By examining the gender gap between siblings, I use household fixed effects 
to control for differences in access to schooling or household wealth that could 
be ­associated with ­ethnicity-level traditions and affect enrollment. Including 
rich socioeconomic and geographic controls interacted with gender accounts for 
21 These consist of indicator variables for whether the father has completed primary school, whether the father’s 
spouse has completed primary school, whether the father works in a high skill sector, whether the father’s spouse 
works in a high skill sector, whether the father works in agriculture, and whether the father’s spouse works in 
agriculture.


--- PAGE 13 ---
1892
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
­socioeconomic and geographic variables that could be correlated with cultural tradi-
tions and could affect the gender gap in education.
To inform potential sources of bias in regression equation (1), the top panels of 
online Appendix Tables A4 and A5 document summary statistics and balance by 
traditional practice for the Indonesia and Ghana census data used in these regres-
sions. Along most dimensions, matrilocal and ­non-matrilocal groups in Indonesia 
are similar. While matrilocal groups are more likely to be Muslim and are slightly 
more likely to have a female household head, my more stringent specifications con-
trol for both these variables. In Ghana, online Appendix Table A5 shows that there 
are strong differences between patrilocal and ­non-patrilocal groups, indicating that 
patrilocal groups are poorer and less educated than ­non-patrilocal groups.
The estimates from regression equation (1) are in Table 2. As the ­upper half 
of the table shows, females in matrilocal households are ­1 to 2 percentage points 
more likely to be enrolled in school relative to their brothers when compared to 
females in ­non-matrilocal households in Indonesia. Neither the gender interactions 
with household socioeconomic status (column 2), alternative ethnic traditions (col-
umn 3), nor geographic location (column 4) fully explain this result. While the 
yearly differences in the likelihood of enrollment appear small, they accumulate. 
Adding up the 18 years a child could have been enrolled in school between the 
ages of 5 and 22, this indicates that there will be a gap in educational attainment of 
0.14–0.38 years of schooling between matrilocal and ­non-matrilocal females (rela-
tive to their brothers). For comparison, Duflo (2001) finds that an additional school 
per 1,000 children increases male years of schooling in Indonesia by 0.12–0.19 
years. Thus, for a female, belonging to a matrilocal ethnic group increases years 
of schooling by about the same amount as ­1 to 2 extra primary schools per 1,000 
children.
The estimates are similar in Ghana. Patrilocal males are approximately 1 percent-
age point more likely to be enrolled in school relative to their sisters when compared 
to ­non-patrilocal males, implying a difference of 0.18 years of education. While the 
estimates are not significant in the first two columns, the inclusion of the gender 
interactions with ethnicity level traditional practices and the ­district-gender fixed 
effects increases their precision.22
Following the epidemiological approach, online Appendix Table A7 reports esti-
mates from the same regressions for children who live outside their ethnic home-
lands. The same relationships are observed in these samples, again suggesting that 
cultural traditions are persistent. In online Appendix Table A8, I examine whether the 
differences in enrollment rates observed in Table 2 are reflected in adults’ education 
levels with the caveat that, for adults, I cannot control for unobserved socioeconomic 
status with household fixed effects and cannot observe and control for parental char-
acteristics. The regressions in this table report the effect of the interaction between 
cultural traditions and gender on primary, secondary, and college completion, and 
22 The results for Indonesia and Ghana are not driven by the differential selection of a sample of children aged 
­5–22 who still live with parents across ethnic groups. Online Appendix Table A6 ­re-estimates equation (1) for a 
sample of children aged ­5–18 and shows that the results are similar if somewhat less precise in this smaller sample.


--- PAGE 14 ---
1893
BAU: CAN POLICY CHANGE CULTURE?
VOL. 111 NO. 6
in the case of Ghana, years of education23 for adults aged ­25–45,24 controlling for 
ethnicity fixed effects, age fixed effects, gender by geographic area fixed effects, 
and ethnic traits interacted with gender. The results for Indonesia indicate that, rela-
tive to traditionally matrilocal males, traditionally matrilocal females are 8.6, 13.5, 
and 2.6 percentage points more like to have completed primary school, secondary 
school, and university, respectively, when compared to ­non-matrilocal females’ out-
comes relative to ­non-matrilocal males. In Ghana, the results are imprecise, but for 
primary schooling (the most likely level of schooling to be affected given the rarity 
of secondary and university completion), the estimates indicate that patrilocal males 
are 2 percentage points more likely to have completed primary school. For years of 
schooling, though insignificant, the estimate indicates that patrilocal males receive 
0.16 more years of schooling, which is very close to the 0.18 years predicted by the 
enrollment estimates.
Finally, I examine whether these findings apply more broadly outside of Indonesia 
and Ghana in online Appendix Section B. Online Appendix Table A9 shows that 
23 Respondents do not report the number of years of schooling in the Indonesia 2010 Census.
24 I focus on this group since adults over the age of 25 are likely to have completed their educational investment, 
and differential mortality is less likely to affect the results in this younger population.
Table 2—Cultural Traditions and the ­Within-Household Gender Gap in Enrollment
Baseline
+ Socioeconomic controls
+  Custom controls
+  Geography controls
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Indonesia
​​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ i​ Female​​
0.021
0.019
0.018
0.008
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
Mean dep. var.
0.694
0.702
0.702
0.702
Observations
4,657,941
4,239,051
4,239,051
4,239,051
Clusters
44
44
44
44
Adjusted ​R​ 2​
0.516
0.512
0.512
0.512
Ghana
​​I​ e​ 
Patrilocal​ × ​I​ i​ Male​​
0.011
0.006
0.009
0.011
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.004)
Mean dep. var.
0.601
0.595
0.595
0.595
Observations
347,918
236,111
236,111
236,111
Clusters
24
24
24
24
Adjusted ​R​ 2​
0.505
0.517
0.517
0.517
Notes: This table reports ­difference-in-difference estimates of the association of the interaction between traditional 
matrilocality and female (Indonesia) and traditional patrilocality and male (Ghana) with enrollment for children 
of the household head aged ­5–22 in Indonesia and Ghana. All regressions include household and age fixed effects. 
Column 2 adds indicator variables for whether the father has completed primary school, whether the father’s spouse 
has completed primary school, whether the father works in a high skill sector, whether the father’s spouse works 
in a high skill sector, whether the father works in agriculture, whether the father’s spouse works in agriculture, 
whether the household head is male, and whether the individual is Muslim interacted with child gender. Column 
3 adds indicator variables for whether a child belongs to an ethnicity with a bride price custom, ­male-dominated 
agriculture, ­polygamy, or aboriginal plow use interacted with child gender. Column 4 adds ­province-gender fixed 
effects (Indonesia) or ­district-gender fixed effects (Ghana). Standard errors are clustered at the Ethnographic Atlas 
ethnicity level.
Sources: Data are drawn from the Indonesia 2010 and Ghana 2000 Censuses (Minnesota Population Center 2011), 
and the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock 1967)


--- PAGE 15 ---
1894
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
the percent of a country’s population that has each cultural tradition affects the 
­country-level gender gap in the expected direction. Together, traditional patrilocality 
and matrilocality explain 4 percent of the global education gender gap.
IV.  Indonesian Pension Program
In this section, I test whether the introduction of a pension program in Indonesia 
differentially reduced female education and the practice of matrilocality among tra-
ditionally matrilocal groups. I first describe the details of the program. I then discuss 
the different empirical strategies used to identify the plan’s effects (all of which 
exploit geographic variation in the location of pension offices), their results, and 
robustness checks. In online Appendix Section C, I report results from an alter-
native identification strategy that exploits geographic variation in manufacturing 
employment.
A. Astek
Astek was founded in Indonesia in 1977 and developed accident, health care, 
death, and provident fund schemes for employees of medium and large firms 
(greater than 100 employees). At the beginning program, employees were required 
to save 1 percent of their earnings and employers provided a matching contribution 
of 1.5 percent. Most funds were initially allocated to bank time deposits with annual 
interest rates of 9 percent, and retirees received their benefits in ­lump-sum form when 
they retired, as long as they were 55 or older.25 By the end of 1983, 8,602 employers 
and 1,960,109 employees were covered by Astek. Coverage expanded rapidly, and 
in 1985, the government estimated that 5.5 million employees would be covered by 
1988 (Perusahan Umum Asuransi Sosial Tenaga Kerja 1985).26 While a minority of 
workers were employed at large firms in the formal sector, the percent of affected 
individuals (due to having an affected worker in their household) is much greater 
than the percent of affected workers. Though I cannot directly observe what share of 
children are affected by the pension plan, I can provide a benchmark for this number 
using the government’s estimate that 5.5 million employees would be covered by 
1988. Using the 1971 weighted census, I randomly assign 5.5 million individuals 
aged ­25–55 to be recipients. Since the IFLS 2007 indicates that 22 ­percent of retired 
pension recipients are female, I randomly assign 22 percent to be females and the 
rest to be males. Under this assignment, 13 percent of adults ­25–55 are affected by 
the pension program, and 23 percent of children under 18 have a pension recipient 
in their household.27
25 The implementation of the pension program means that it is unlikely that it would have immediately changed 
family composition, and therefore affected education due to changes in family structure, unlike the South African 
OAP program studied by Hamoudi and Thomas (2014), since ­payouts from the plan would not have taken place 
until current workers retired.
26 Purwoko (1997) reports that 6.3 million workers were enrolled in 1993, and 14.6 million were enrolled by 
1997.
27 If I instead use the official count from 1993 of 6.3 million enrollees (Purwoko 1997) in this simulation, 
15 percent of adults ­25–55 are affected, and 26 percent of children under the age of 18 are in a household with 
a recipient. I can also use the 1980 Census as a base year instead of the 1971 Census to evaluate whether pop-
ulation growth has important implications for these numbers. The percents of the population affected using the 


--- PAGE 16 ---
1895
BAU: CAN POLICY CHANGE CULTURE?
VOL. 111 NO. 6
B. ­Triple-Differences Estimates for Females
­Province-Level Empirical Strategy.—My main empirical strategy is a 
­triple-differences exploiting the locations of the pension plan offices in Indonesia. 
In this strategy, there are two pieces of variation that determine the degree to 
which a female in the 2010 Indonesia Census was affected by the introduction 
of Astek. First, if a daughter was sufficiently old when the pension plan was 
introduced, it will be too late for the program to affect parents’ educational 
investments and transmission of the cultural tradition. These investments will 
have already been made. Second, when the program was introduced, some geo-
graphic areas were more intensively treated by the pension plan than others. 
The cohort variation can be combined with this geographic variation to create 
a ­difference-in-differences estimator of the effect of the pension program in 
Indonesia.28 Additionally, since I am interested in the differential effect of the 
pension plan on traditionally matrilocal groups, I also exploit variation in whether 
a female belongs to a traditionally matrilocal ethnic group. Combining the geo-
graphic, cohort, and ­ethnicity-level variation results in the final ­triple-differences  
strategy.
Geographic variation in Astek’s roll-out comes from the fact that, though it was 
national, Astek expanded its coverage over time and initial compliance was imper-
fect. From 1978 to 1979, the number of enrollees grew by 24 percent, and from 
1979 to 1980, it grew by 12 percent. By 1983, only 40 percent of eligible individ-
uals were enrolled (Sudomo 1985). Thus, I exploit the fact that areas with more 
Astek branch offices, liaisons, and representatives likely had higher initial enroll-
ment. The second volume of a ­two-part series entitled Readings in Social Security: 
The Indonesian Case, published by the Astek Research and Development Board 
(Perusahan Umum Asuransi Sosial Tenaga Kerja 1985), reports the locations of 
these offices at the ­district-level in 1985, and Figure 2 plots their locations, assign-
ing each office to the district centroid. Supporting the idea that the pension offices 
created geographic variation in exposure to the plan, online Appendix Table A10 
confirms that living in a province with more pension offices per 1,000 square 
miles is positively associated with receiving a public pension in round 4 of the 
IFLS (2007).29, 30
1980 ­Census are reasonably similar to those using the 1971 Census (11 percent of adults ­25–55 and 20 percent of 
children under 18).
28 This identification strategy is similar to the one used by Duflo (2001) to estimate the effect of the INPRES 
school construction on education outcomes in Indonesia.
29 I focus on the 2007 round rather than combining the 2007 and 2000 rounds because the 2007 round has more 
detailed questions on pension plan receipt. The regressions control for age fixed effects and ethnicity fixed effects 
to account for variation in pension policy access over time and across ethnic groups.
30 While office locations in 1985 are positively associated with pension receipt in 2007, the point estimates 
in this table cannot be interpreted as estimating differences in pension plan enrollment in the 1980s due to office 
locations for two reasons. First, enrollment in the plan expanded over time, attenuating the importance of office 
locations for enrollment in later years. Second, the IFLS sample covers relatively more urban and developed areas 
and provinces. Thus, it may not fully capture differences in enrollment between the most and least intensively 
treated provinces.


--- PAGE 17 ---
1896
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
Using the cohort, geographic, and ­ethnicity-level variation and a sample of 
females born between 1959 and 1985, my first ­triple-differences specification is
(2)	
​​y​icpe​  =  ​β​1​ ​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Full_Treat​ × ​Intensity​p​ 
	
+ ​β​2​ ​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Part_Treat​ × ​Intensity​p​ + ​α​cp​ + ​α​e​ 
	
+ ​∑ 
p​ ​ ​γ​p​ ​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ + ​∑ 
c​ ​ ​λ​c​ ​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ + Γ ​X​icpe​ + ​ε​icpe​,
​where ​i​ denotes an individual, ​c​ denotes the individual’s birth year, ​p​ denotes the 
province of an individual’s birth, and ​e​ denotes an ethnic group. The outcomes of 
interest, ​​y​icpe​​, consist of indicator variables for completing primary and secondary 
schooling, university, and an indicator variable for practicing matrilocality (a mar-
ried woman living in the same household as at least one of her parents). The vari-
able ​​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​​ is an indicator equal to 1 if an individual belongs to a traditionally 
matrilocal ethnic group, and ​​I​ c​ 
Part_Treat​​ and ​​I​ c​ 
Full_Treat​​ indicate the individual’s exposure 
to the plan based on her birth year;  ​​I​ c​ 
Part_Treat​​ is equal to 1 if a woman was between 6 
and 12 when the plan was instituted, and ​​I​ c​ 
Full_Treat​​ is an indicator variable equal to 1 
if she was 6 or younger. A woman who was younger when the pension plan was insti-
tuted is likely to be more affected both because parents would have had more time to 
change their educational investments and because offices and compliance expanded 
in the early years, increasing the likelihood her parents were enrolled in the plan 
during her childhood. The term ​​α​cp​​ is a birth ­province-birth year fixed effect, ​​α​e​​ is an  
ethnic group fixed effect, and ​∑ p​ 
  ​γ​p​ ​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​​ and ​∑ c​ 
  ​λ​c​ ​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​​ allow the birth 
Figure 2. Locations of Astek Offices in Indonesia
Note: The figure documents the locations of the Astek pension plan offices in Indonesia in 1985.
Sources: Population shares are constructed using the Indonesia 2010 Census (Minnesota Population Center 2011) 
and Murdock (1967). Data on pension office locations are drawn from Perusahan Umum Asuransi Sosial Tenaga 
Kerja (1985).
Regional office type         Branch           Liaison          Representative
Indonesia
0–6.1%                  6.2–22%                  22.1–47.9%                  48–75.7%                  75.8–99.1%
Share matrilocal
N


--- PAGE 18 ---
1897
BAU: CAN POLICY CHANGE CULTURE?
VOL. 111 NO. 6
­province and cohort fixed effects to depend on whether a woman belongs to a 
­matrilocal ethnic group.
The term ​​X​icpe​​ is a vector of controls. To control for differential time trends, it 
always includes a linear trend in birth year whose coefficient is allowed to vary at 
the birth ­province-matrilocal level. To control for the fact that matrilocality may be 
correlated with other traditions, it also includes triple interactions between ​​I​ e​ 
Intensity​​ 
and ​​I​ c​ 
Full_Treat​​ and ​​I​ e​ 
Part_Treat​​ and other ethnic traditions.31 Importantly, it includes 
Muslim by birth province fixed effects interacted with indicator variables for 
treatment group (­partial treatment, full treatment, or none). To control for other 
programs that were ­on-going during the same period in Indonesia, I also interact 
­province-level controls for the INPRES school construction and water sanitation 
programs described by Duflo (2001) with ­matrilocal-birth year fixed effects and 
include these controls. To account for the fact that pension offices were placed 
in more urban or dense areas, I use the Indonesia 1971 Census to calculate the 
population density and percent of the population that lived in urban areas for each 
province. Since I will ultimately use three different geographic measures of pen-
sion plan exposure, and the functional form of population density’s relationship 
with these measures is likely to be different across measures, I include controls for 
­matrilocal-birth year fixed effects interacted with both the birth province’s popula-
tion density and log population density. This ensures a consistent set of population 
density controls across specifications. In addition, I control for ­matrilocal-birth year 
fixed effects interacted with share that lived in urban areas in the 1971 Census. In 
robustness tests, I will also use a lasso procedure to select the functional form of 
the population density controls rather than specifying it ex ante. Finally, I ­two-way 
cluster the standard errors by birth province and ethnicity in the Ethnographic Atlas.
The coefficients of interest are ​​β​1​​ and ​​β​2​​. The conceptual framework predicts 
that ​​β​1​  <  0​ and ​​β​2​  <  0​. As fully treated females are more intensively treated than 
partially treated females, we also expect that the magnitude of ​​β​1​​ is greater than ​​β​2​​. 
Note, ​​β​1​​ and ​​β​2​​ are differential effects. As education levels in Indonesia were increas-
ing during this period, the estimates should be interpreted not as a reduction in edu-
cation levels but rather as indicating how much higher education levels would have 
been among matrilocal females in the absence of the pension program.
I include females born between 1959 and 1985 so that the oldest females were 18 
at the time the pension plan was instituted and were wholly untreated during their 
childhood. The youngest females were −8 and were fully treated. I do not include 
women born later than 1985 so that women are at least 25 when they are observed. 
Those who will go to university have already done so, and most are married, allow-
ing me to test for the practice of matrilocality. When I estimate the effects of the 
pension plan on the practice of matrilocality, I restrict the sample to married women, 
since unmarried women cannot be observed practicing matrilocality. The bottom 
panel of online Appendix Table A4 reports summary statistics for this sample.
The ­triple-differences approach allows me to address several potential sources of 
bias in the estimates. One natural concern is that pension plans were established in 
31 These consist of traditional polygamy, aboriginal plow use, ­male-dominated agriculture, and bride price. To 
avoid losing a significant fraction of the sample, missing values were set to 0, and indicator variables for missing 
information were also included in the triple and double interactions.


--- PAGE 19 ---
1898
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
response to concerns about lack of old age support driven by declines in the practice 
of matrilocality. Since I exploit geographic variation in the program’s intensity, I 
control for traditionally ­matrilocal-birth year fixed effects, absorbing any gener-
alized declines in the practice of matrilocality. Along with ethnicity fixed effects, 
this also absorbs any level differences between matrilocal and ­non-matrilocal ethnic 
groups. Therefore, my key coefficients of interest, ​​β​1​​ and ​​β​2​​, will only be biased if
matrilocality was declining faster in areas that then received more pension offices. 
This is unlikely to be the case since pension plan offices were not initially targeted 
to areas with more matrilocal ethnic groups (Figure 2). However, I further address
this concern by controlling for ­matrilocal-birth province linear time trends so that 
the effects of the plan are identified from the discontinuous effect of being exposed 
to the plan during childhood.
Another concern is that there are differential educational trends between matri-
local and ­non-matrilocal groups. The ­triple-differences identification strategy also 
accounts for this by including ­matrilocal-birth year fixed effects. Similarly, while 
more heavily traditionally matrilocal areas may have different time trends, different 
returns to education, or have received different policies that affect the practice of 
matrilocality or female education, the inclusion of birth ­province-birth year fixed 
effects absorbs this variation. Analogously, while ​​Intensity​p​​ is not randomly dis-
tributed across provinces, birth ­province-matrilocal fixed effects absorb these level 
differences across space. The identifying variation for ​​β​1​​ and ​​β​2​​ comes from com-
paring traditionally matrilocal and ­non-matrilocal females of the same age in the 
same geographic regions who face similar labor markets.
To further address identification concerns, I also estimate equation (2) for edu-
cational outcomes for the population of males. Males serve as a natural comparison 
group, since the conceptual framework indicates that the introduction of the pension 
plan should not have as large a negative effect on males’ education as females’. 
However, males also are not a true placebo group. If the pension program affects 
females’ education, males may be affected through sibling spillovers or marriage 
market incentives.
I do not estimate effects on the practice of matrilocality for males since a male’s 
likelihood of living with his wife’s parents is likely to be highly related to whether 
the wife herself practices matrilocality. Unlike the educational outcomes, it is not 
clear we should expect a null or quantitatively smaller effect on living in a house-
hold that is practicing matrilocality for males.­­­­
 Building up to the  Triple-Differences:  Difference-in-Differences by  Subgroup.—
Before reporting the ­triple-differences results, I build up to equation (2) by report-
ing the results from each of the component ­difference-in-differences regressions in 
the ­triple-differences specification. For each of four subgroups, matrilocal females, 
matrilocal males, ­non-matrilocal females, and ­non-matrilocal males, I estimate
(3)	​
​y​icpe​  =  ​β​1​ ​I​ c​ 
Full_Treat​ × ​Intensity​p​ + ​β​2​ ​I​ c​ 
Part_Treat​ × ​Intensity​p​ 	
+ ​ α​c​ + ​ α​p​​ + ​ α​e​ +  Γ ​X​icp​ + ​ε​icpe​ ,​


--- PAGE 20 ---
1899
BAU: CAN POLICY CHANGE CULTURE?
VOL. 111 NO. 6
where ​​X​icp​​ consists of an indicator variable for Muslim, linear time trends that are 
allowed to vary at the birth ­province-level, and the population density and urban-
ization controls interacted with birth year. Online Appendix Table A11 reports the 
results for each subgroup.
The results for matrilocal females are consistent with the conceptual frame-
work: fully treated females in more exposed districts experience reductions in 
primary, secondary, and university completion, and the practice of matrilocality. 
Column 5 further controls for current province, in addition to birth province, and 
shows that controlling for conditions in an individual’s current province does not 
eliminate the effect of the pension plan on the practice of matrilocality. Since 
the average matrilocal female was born in a province where ​​Intensity​p​  =  0.144​, 
the effects indicate that the average fully treated traditionally matrilocal female 
is 2.7 percentage points less likely to complete primary school, 3.6 percentage 
points less likely to complete secondary school, 1.9 percentage points less likely 
to attend university, and 2.1 percentage points less likely to practice matrilocality. 
For matrilocal males, there is some evidence of significant negative effects, par-
ticularly for primary schooling, pointing to the possibility that differential time 
trends across provinces may be biasing the ­difference-in-differences estimates. 
This highlights the potential value of the ­triple-differences strategy, which controls 
for birth ­province-birth year fixed effects. However, the point estimates for fully 
treated males’ secondary and university outcomes are insignificant and ­one-tenth 
to ­one-third as large as the estimates for females. They are statistically signifi-
cantly different from those for fully treated, matrilocal females at the 1 percent 
level. Turning to ­non-matrilocal ethnic groups, there are no significant negative 
effects on education for either males or females, nor are there significant negative 
effects on the practice of matrilocality.
Provincial ­Triple-Differences for Females.—Panel A of Table 3 reports the 
­triple-differences estimates for females using the ​​Intensity​p​​ measure. Consistent 
with the idea that the primary schooling effects observed for both matrilocal males 
and females in the ­difference-in-differences estimates may have been driven by 
provincial time trends, these effects are no longer significant. However, for fully 
treated, traditionally matrilocal females, there are significant and economically 
meaningful effects on secondary (−5 percentage points (pp) at the average value 
of ​​Intensity​p​​ for matrilocal females) and university completion (−1.4 pp), as well as 
the practice of matrilocality (−7 pp). While these effects are large, recalling that an 
estimated 23 percent of children are directly affected by the program, large spillover 
effects are not necessary to explain these effect sizes. Panel B of Table 3 reports the 
­triple-differences results with an alternative specification: ​​Intensity​p​​ is replaced by 
the log number of offices in a province, and the specification controls for the log 
area of the province and its triple interactions with ​​I​ c​ 
Part_Treat​​, ​​I​ c​ 
Full_Treat​​, and ​​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​​ . 
While this specification drops 2 provinces that have 0 offices, the pattern of the 
results is very similar. Greater pension plan exposure reduces secondary and univer-
sity completion, as well as the practice of matrilocality.
Online Appendix Table A12 reports the results of a robustness check that helps 
ensure that the estimates in Table 3 are not driven by the inclusion of both the 
log and linear population density controls. I run a lasso regression of each of 


--- PAGE 21 ---
1900
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
the geographic pension intensity measures on population density and log pop-
ulation density. I then control for the interactions of the selected control(s) 
with ­matrilocal-birth year fixed effects instead of automatically including the 
Table 3—­Triple-Differences Estimates of the Differential Effect of Pension Plan Exposure  
for Indonesian Females
Practice
Matrilocality
Practice
Matrilocality
Primary
Secondary
University
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A. ​​Intensity​p​​ Measure
​​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Part_Treat​ × ​Intensity​p​​
−0.059
−0.228
−0.078
−0.171
−0.178
(0.103)
(0.075)
(0.030)
(0.047)
(0.046)
​​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Full_Treat​ × ​Intensity​p​​
−0.007
−0.357
−0.100
−0.466
−0.497
(0.168)
(0.152)
(0.042)
(0.125)
(0.116)
Current province fixed effects
N
N
N
N
Y
Mean dependent variable
0.876
0.320
0.056
0.079
0.079
Observations
4,780,573
4,780,573
4,780,573
4,461,289
4,461,289
Adjusted ​R​ 2​
0.837
0.823
0.513
0.675
0.733
Panel B. log number of offices measure
​​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Part_Treat​ × log​(​num. offices​p​)​​
0.002
−0.033
−0.010
−0.014
−0.015
(0.014)
(0.016)
(0.006)
(0.008)
(0.008)
​​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Full_Treat​ × log​(​num. offices​p​)​​
0.031
−0.044
−0.014
−0.031
−0.033
(0.029)
(0.019)
(0.006)
(0.018)
(0.018)
Current province fixed effects
N
N
N
N
Y
Mean dependent variable
0.877
0.320
0.056
0.079
0.079
Observations
4,677,531
4,677,531
4,677,531
4,364,884
4,364,884
Adjusted ​R​ 2​
0.840
0.827
0.519
0.689
0.741
Panel C. Distance to a pension office
​​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Part_Treat​ × log​(​distance​d​)​​
−0.022
0.000
0.007
−0.005
−0.005
(0.008)
(0.012)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.004)
​​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Full_Treat​ × log​(​distance​d​)​​
−0.038
−0.016
0.008
−0.019
−0.021
(0.011)
(0.015)
(0.004)
(0.009)
(0.008)
Current district fixed effects
N
N
N
N
Y
Mean dependent variable
0.880
0.318
0.055
0.080
0.080
Observations
4,618,188
4,618,188
4,618,188
4,313,952
4,313,949
Adjusted ​R​ 2​
0.648
0.609
0.212
0.429
0.483
Notes: This table reports ­triple-differences estimates of the effect of the 1977 institution of the Astek pension 
plan on women, exploiting the interaction between years exposed to the plan (partial treatment indicates a woman 
was ­6–12 when the pension plan was initiated, and full treatment indicates that she was younger than 6), a geo-
graphic ­area-level measure of treatment intensity, and whether an individual belongs to a matrilocal ethnic group. 
The sample consists of women born between 1959 and 1985. All panels include birth ­province-matrilocal fixed 
effects, ethnicity fixed effects, birth ­province-birth year fixed effects, and linear time trends in birth year interacted 
with birth ­province-matrilocal fixed effects. All panels also include cultural trait interactions (­ethnicity-level con-
trols for the interaction between traditional plow use, ­male-dominated agriculture, polygamy, and bride price with 
the geographic ­area-level measure of pension plan affectedness, indicator variables for partial and full treatment, 
and the relevant double interactions), population density controls (geographic area linear and log population den-
sity and percent urban from the 1971 Census interacted with ­matrilocal-birth year fixed effects), and controls for 
the INPRES program and a water and sanitation program (at the geographic level of the treatment) interacted with 
­matrilocal-birth year fixed effects. Panels A and B include ­muslim-birth ­province-treatment cohort (partial, full, or 
none) fixed effects. Panel C includes ­muslim-birth ­district-treatment cohort fixed effects and the relevant double 
interactions for the treatment variables that are not subsumed by the fixed effects. Standard errors are ­two-way clus-
tered at the Ethnographic Atlas ethnic ­group-level and the birth geographic ­area-level (province in panels A and B 
and district in panel C). There are 45 ethnic groups, 26 provinces, and 464 districts.
Sources: ­Individual-level data are drawn from the Indonesia 2010 Census (Minnesota Population Center 2011). 
Data on pension office locations come from Perusahan Umum Asuransi Sosial Tenaga Kerja (1985), and data on 
ethnic traditions are from Murdock (1967).


--- PAGE 22 ---
1901
BAU: CAN POLICY CHANGE CULTURE?
VOL. 111 NO. 6
­interactions of both measures with ­matrilocal-birth year fixed effects as controls. 
The estimates are very similar to those in Table 3.
­District-Level Distance Variation.—I next assess whether using an alternative, 
­district-level distance measure of pension exposure based on office locations deliv-
ers similar results. This measure ​​distance​d​​ is the sum of an ­intra-district distance 
measure and a ­cross-district distance measure and is given by
(4)	
​​distance​d​  =  ​cross_distance​d​ + ​intra_distance​d​,​
where ​d​ denotes a district, ​​cross_distance​d​​ is the distance from district ​d​’s centroid 
to the centroid of the closest district with a pension office, and ​​intra_distance​d​​ is 
the average distance in district ​d​ to ​d​’s centroid.32 The inclusion of the ­intra-district 
distance measure accounts for the effects of distance within districts that have 
pension offices. As the geographic variation is now at the ­district-level, the new 
­triple-differences estimating equation is
(5)  ​​y​icpde​  =  ​β​1​ ​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Full_Treat​ × ​(− log​(​distance​d​)​)​
	
+ ​β​2​ ​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Part_Treat​ × ​(− log​(​distance​d​)​)​
	
+ ​α​cp​ + ​α​e​ + ​∑ 
p​ ​ ​γ​p​ ​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ + ​∑ 
c​ ​ ​λ​c​ ​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ + Γ ​X​ipde​ + ​ε​icpde​,​
where I multiply ​log​(​distance​d​)​​ by ​− 1​ so that, consistent with Table 3, the con-
ceptual framework would predict that all the coefficients for females are nega-
tive, and ​​X​ipde​​ now includes ­Muslim-treated ­cohort-birth district fixed effects, the 
double interaction between ​​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​​ and ​log​(​distance​d​)​​, and relevant triple- and 
­double-interactions of the cultural traditions controls with ​log​(​distance​d​)​​. Since the 
geographic variation is now at the birth ­district-level, I calculate my geographic 
controls at the ­district-level instead of the ­province-level, and I ­two-way cluster my 
standard errors at the Ethnographic Atlas ethnicity and birth ­district-levels. I focus 
on ​log​(​distance​d​)​​ as my distance measure rather than a linear distance variable since 
it is likely that distance matters less at very great distances.
Panel C of Table 3 reports the results. We again see that traditionally matrilocal 
women who are more exposed to the pension plan are less educated and less likely 
to practice matrilocality as adults.33 There is one interesting difference, however, 
between the ­province-level estimates and the ­district-level, distance estimates. In 
panel C, the educational effects are largest for primary schooling, although the point 
estimate for secondary schooling is also negative. This may reflect the fact that these 
different strategies capture households who are on different margins of educational 
investment. For example, the distance strategy may exploit more variation from 
32 For the counts of offices, I focused on provincial variation rather than ­district-level variation because 
93 ­percent of districts do not have offices. Thus, I expect the effects of offices to extend beyond district borders and 
wanted to exploit variation from the existence of offices in neighboring districts.
33 The results in online Appendix Table A12, which uses lasso to determine whether to include a linear or log 
population density control (or both) interacted with ­matrilocal-birth year fixed effects are very similar to the results 
reported in panel C of Table 3.


--- PAGE 23 ---
1902
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
households in less dense, less developed provinces with lower baseline education 
rates (that received few pension offices), who are still relatively close to pension 
offices in other provinces.
Table 4—­Triple-Differences Estimates of the Differential Effect of Pension Plan 
Exposure for Indonesian Males
Primary
Secondary
University
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A. ​​Intensity​p​​ measure
​​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Part_Treat​ × ​Intensity​p​​
−0.037
−0.132
−0.027
(0.064)
(0.072)
(0.031)
​​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Full_Treat​ × ​Intensity​p​​
0.000
−0.245
−0.038
(0.116)
(0.160)
(0.062)
Mean dependent variable
0.912
0.388
0.066
Observations
4,789,858
4,789,858
4,789,858
Adjusted ​R​ 2​
0.794
0.801
0.509
Panel B. log number of offices measure
​​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Part_Treat​ × log​(​num. offices​p​)​​
0.013
−0.012
0.005
(0.010)
(0.013)
(0.006)
​​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Full_Treat​ × log​(​num. offices​p​)​​
0.032
−0.009
0.012
(0.020)
(0.021)
(0.011)
Mean dependent variable
0.912
0.389
0.066
Observations
4,687,691
4,687,691
4,687,691
Adjusted ​R​ 2​
0.799
0.803
0.515
Panel C. Distance to a pension office
​​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Part_Treat​ × log​(​distance​d​)​​
−0.003
0.001
−0.007
(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.006)
​​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Full_Treat​ × log​(​distance​d​)​​
−0.011
0.003
−0.007
(0.008)
(0.010)
(0.010)
Mean dependent variable
0.915
0.386
0.065
Observations
4,623,739
4,623,739
4,623,739
Adjusted ​R​ 2​
0.754
0.853
0.605
Notes: This table reports ­triple-differences estimates of the effect of the 1977 institution of the 
Astek pension plan on men, exploiting the interaction between years exposed to the plan (par-
tial treatment indicates a man was ­6–12 when the pension plan was initiated, and full treat-
ment indicates that he was younger than 6), a geographic ­area-level measure of treatment 
intensity, and whether an individual belongs to a matrilocal ethnic group. The sample consists 
of men born between 1959 and 1985 in the 2010 Indonesia Census. All panels include birth 
­province-matrilocal fixed effects, ethnicity fixed effects, birth ­province-birth year fixed effects, 
and linear time trends in birth year interacted with birth ­province-matrilocal fixed effects. 
All panels also include cultural trait interactions (­ethnicity-level controls for the interaction 
between traditional plow use, ­male-dominated agriculture, polygamy, and bride price with the 
geographic ­area-level measure of pension plan affectedness, indicator variables for partial and 
full treatment, and the relevant double interactions), population density controls (geographic 
area linear and log population density and percent urban from the 1971 Census interacted with 
­matrilocal-birth year fixed effects), and controls for the INPRES program and a water and san-
itation program (at the geographic level of the treatment) interacted with ­matrilocal-birth year 
fixed effects. Panels A and B include ­muslim-birth ­province-treatment cohort (partial, full, or 
none) fixed effects. Panel C includes ­muslim-birth ­district-treatment cohort fixed effects and 
the relevant double interactions for the treatment variables that are not subsumed by the fixed 
effects. Standard errors are ­two-way clustered at the Ethnographic Atlas ethnic ­group-level and 
the birth geographic ­area-level (province in panels A and B, and district in panel C). There are 
45 ethnic groups, 26 provinces, and 464 districts.
Sources: ­Individual-level data are drawn from the Indonesia 2010 Census (Minnesota 
Population Center 2011). Data on pension office locations come from Perusahan Umum 
Asuransi Sosial Tenaga Kerja (1985), and data on ethnic traditions are from Murdock (1967).


--- PAGE 24 ---
1903
BAU: CAN POLICY CHANGE CULTURE?
VOL. 111 NO. 6
­Triple-Differences Estimates for Males.—Using the same specifications as in 
Table 3, Table 4 reports the educational estimates for males. For all three panels, 
there are no statistically significant negative effects on education for fully treated 
males. In cases where the effects for males are negative, the magnitude of the effect 
for females is always greater, often on the order of ­2– 4 times. This further suggests 
that the results in Table 3 are not driven by a confounding variable or time trends 
that differentially affect traditionally matrilocal individuals’ education. Rather, con-
sistent with the conceptual framework, the pension plan appears to more strongly 
affect females’ educational outcomes.
C. ­Nonlinear Effects
Equation (2) assumes the effect of ​​Intensity​p​​ is linear. However, the conceptual 
framework predicts that the effect of the pension plan on matrilocal females may be 
nonlinear due to the cultural externality. I directly test whether this is the case by 
estimating treatment effects by a birth province’s tercile for ​​Intensity​p​​. The resulting 
regression equation is
(6)	
​​y​icpe​  =  ​β​1​ ​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Full_Treat​ × ​I​ p​ 
Q2​ + ​β​2​ ​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Part_Treat​ × ​I​ p​ 
Q2​
	
+ ​β​3​ ​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Full_Treat​ × ​I​ p​ 
Q3​ + ​β​4​ ​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Part_Treat​ × ​I​ p​ 
Q3​
	
+  ​α​cp​ + ​α​e​ + ​∑ 
p​ ​ ​γ​p​ ​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ + ​∑ 
c​ ​ ​λ​c​ ​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ + Γ ​X​icpe​ + ​ε​icpe​ ,​
where ​​I​ p​ 
Q2​​ is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the province is in the middle ­tercile, ​​I​ p​ 
Q3​​ 
is an indicator variable equal to 1 if it is in the top tercile, and ​​X​icpe​​ now includes 
triple and double interactions between the cultural trait controls and the tercile indi-
cator variables. Table 5 reports the estimates from equation (6). I again find that pen-
sion exposure reduces secondary and university completion, as well as the practice 
of matrilocality. Furthermore, there is some evidence that the effects are ­nonlinear 
and concentrated in the ­top-tercile of provinces.
D. Event Study Graphs
Though the ­triple-differences procedure accounts for many potential identifica-
tion concerns, the estimates will still be biased if traditionally matrilocal groups 
in more intensively treated areas experience ­nonlinear differential time trends. To 
establish if trends are parallel prior to the treatment, and if the timing of the effects I 
measure coincides with the pension plan, I plot event study graph versions of equa-
tions (2) and (6). These graphs plot the differential effect on matrilocal females of 
being born in a province with a higher intensity of treatment by cohort. To allow for 
more ­pre-treatment periods, I also include women born between 1945 and 1965 in 
the 1990 Census in the data used for estimation.34
34 Since the two censuses have different sampling procedures, I use the provided sampling weights to make 
them comparable.


--- PAGE 25 ---
1904
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
To plot these graphs I follow a ­two-step procedure. If I include both the interac-
tions between birth group indicator variables and ​​Intensity​p​ × ​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​​ and controls 
for linear differential time trends at the ­matrilocal-birth province level in the same 
regression, these two sets of explanatory variables will be almost collinear.35 So, I 
first estimate a regression similar to equation (2), except that all the terms besides 
the main treatment effects are now interacted with survey fixed effects to account 
for differences between the 1990 and 2010 Census, and subtract out the estimated 
effects of the differential, linear time trends. Then, I estimate the event study regres-
sion using the residual variation in the outcome variable as the new outcome. In the 
second step, the event study analogue of equation (2) is
(7)      ​​y ̃ ​icpes​  =  ​∑ 
g​ ​τ​g​ ​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
c∈g​ × ​Intensity​p​ + ​α​cps​ + ​α​es​ 
	
+ ​∑ 
ps​ ​ ​γ​ps​ ​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ + ​∑ 
cs​ ​ ​λ​cs​ ​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ + Γ ​X​ipes​ + ​ε​icpes​ ,​
35 A typical event study graph might report the coefficients on ­matrilocal-birth year fixed effects interacted 
with ​​Intensity​p​​. These variables would be fully collinear with the time trends controls in my main regression 
specifications. In practice, I group cohorts into ­3-year birth groups to increase statistical power. These birth 
­group-traditional matrilocal fixed effects interacted with ​​Intensity​p​​ are not fully collinear with the time trends con-
trols, but they are highly correlated. If both sets of variables were included in the same regression, the time trend 
controls would only be identified from variation in outcomes within ­3-year birth groups, which may be sensitive to 
­age-heaping. This is likely to lead to very different time trend estimates than my main ­triple-differences regressions. 
The ­two-step procedure described below allows me to estimate the time trend controls’ coefficients using the same 
variation as in the triple differences specification in Table 3.
Table 5—Nonlinear Effects of Pension Plan Exposure
Practice
Matrilocality
Practice
Matrilocality
Primary
Secondary
University
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
​​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Part_Treat​ × ​I​ p​ 
Q3​​
−0.001
−0.073
−0.020
−0.031
−0.033
(0.018)
(0.020)
(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.009)
​​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Full_Treat​ × ​I​ p​ 
Q3​​
0.034
−0.107
−0.035
−0.084
−0.088
(0.040)
(0.041)
(0.012)
(0.026)
(0.024)
​​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Part_Treat​ × ​I​ p​ 
Q2​​
−0.012
−0.028
0.007
0.003
0.001
(0.024)
(0.049)
(0.015)
(0.007)
(0.007)
​​I​ e​ 
Matrilocal​ × ​I​ c​ 
Full_Treat​ × ​I​ p​ 
Q2​​
0.016
−0.048
−0.017
0.011
0.008
(0.046)
(0.058)
(0.020)
(0.018)
(0.017)
Current province fixed effects
N
N
N
N
Y
Mean dependent variable
0.876
0.320
0.056
0.079
0.079
Observations
4,780,573
4,780,573
4,780,573
4,461,289
4,461,289
Adjusted ​R​ 2​
0.837
0.823
0.512
0.688
0.737
Notes: This table reports ­nonlinear ­triple-differences estimates of the effect of the 1977 institution of the Astek 
pension plan on women, exploiting the interaction between years exposed to the plan (partial treatment indicates 
a woman was ­6–12 when the pension plan was initiated, and full treatment indicates that she was younger than 6), 
tercile of ​​Intensity​p​​, and whether an individual belongs to a matrilocal ethnic group. The sample consists of women 
born between 1959 and 1985 in the 2010 Indonesia Census. All regressions include the same controls as panel A 
of Table 3 except that the cultural trait interactions are now interacted with the treatment tercile indicator variables. 
Standard errors are ­two-way clustered at the Ethnographic Atlas ethnic ­group-level and the birth ­province-level. 
There are 45 ethnic groups and 26 provinces.
Sources: ­Individual-level data are drawn from the Indonesia 2010 Census (Minnesota Population Center 2011). 
Data on pension office locations come from Perusahan Umum Asuransi Sosial Tenaga Kerja (1985), and data on 
ethnic traditions are from Murdock (1967).
