

--- PAGE 1 ---
American Economic Review 2020, 110(12): 3705–3747 
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20171397
3705
 Competition and Entry in Agricultural Markets: 
Experimental Evidence from Kenya†
By Lauren Falcao Bergquist and Michael Dinerstein*
African agricultural markets are characterized by low farmer rev-
enues and high consumer food prices. Many have worried that this 
wedge is partially driven by imperfect competition among interme-
diaries. This paper provides experimental evidence from Kenya on 
intermediary market structure. Randomized cost shocks and demand 
subsidies are used to identify a structural model of market competi-
tion. Estimates reveal that traders act consistently with joint profit 
maximization and earn median markups of 39 percent. ­Exogenously 
induced firm entry has negligible effects on prices, and low ­take-up 
of subsidized entry offers implies large fixed costs. We estimate that 
traders capture 82 percent of total surplus. (JEL L13, O13, Q11, 
Q12, Q13)
The 1980s and 1990s saw a wave of liberalization sweep across African agricul-
tural markets as part of broad structural adjustment plans. Inherent in the promise of 
these reforms was the presumption that a competitive private sector would emerge 
to take advantage of newly created arbitrage opportunities, with agricultural trad-
ers efficiently moving crops from surplus to deficit regions, and from harvest to 
lean seasons. However, recent empirical estimates suggest that agricultural mar-
kets remain poorly integrated, with prices varying widely across regions and sea-
sons (Moser, Barrett, and Minten 2009; Burke, Bergquist, and Miguel 2019). High 
* Bergquist: Department of Economics, University of Michigan (email: lfb@umich.edu); Dinerstein: Kenneth 
C. Griffin Department of Economics, University of Chicago (email: mdinerstein@uchicago.edu). Esther Duflo was 
the coeditor for this article. We thank Hoyt Bleakley, Marshall Burke, Ying Fan, Benjamin Faber, Willa Friedman, 
Benjamin Handel, Kaushik Krishnan, Nicolas Li, Jeremy Magruder, Jamie McCasland, Edward Miguel, Craig 
McIntosh, Odyssia Ng, Katalin Springel, Christopher Sullivan, Michael Walker, and Dean Yang, as well as seminar 
audiences at Boston University, Columbia, Cornell Dyson, IFPRI, Microsoft Research, MIT/Harvard, Northwestern, 
NYU, Penn State, UC Berkeley, UC Santa Cruz, University of Chicago, University of Michigan, University of 
Tennessee, University of Wisconsin, World Bank Development Research Group, and Yale, and to participants at 
many workshops and conferences. We also thank three anonymous referees for their valuable comments. Finally, 
we thank Honglin Li, Meshack Odhiambo Okello, Ben Wekesa, Deborrah Muthoki Wambua, and Innovations for 
Poverty Action for excellent research assistance. Bergquist would like to acknowledge financial support from the 
NSF Graduate Research Fellowship and the research initiative “Private Enterprise Development in ­Low-Income 
Countries” (EG 1764 and MRG004_3854), a program funded jointly by the Centre for Economic Policy Research 
(CEPR) and the Department for International Development (DFID). The views expressed are not necessarily those 
of CEPR or DFID. The design for this experiment was registered with the AEA RCT Registry ­AEARCTR-0000682 
(see Bergquist 2015). IRB approval provided by the University of California, Berkeley (CPHS Protocol Number 
­2014-08-6612) and the Maseno University Ethics Review Committee (Proposal Reference Number MSU/DRPC/
MUERC/000081/14). The data repository is ­openicpsr-119743 (see Bergquist and Dinerstein 2020). All errors 
are our own.
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20171397 to visit the article page for additional materials and author  
disclosure statements.


--- PAGE 2 ---
3706
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
DECEMBER 2020
­transaction costs contribute to this limited market integration. Transport costs in 
Africa are the highest in the world (Teravaninthorn and Raballand 2009); also prev-
alent are ­harder-to-measure costs associated with search (Aker 2010), contractual 
risk (Startz 2017), and price uncertainty (Dillon and Dambro 2016).
However, much less is known about the form of competition among intermediary 
traders in agricultural markets in developing countries. Whether, and how much, 
traders are exerting market power matters for policymaking: if intermediaries are 
operating in a competitive environment in which price gaps are purely due to high 
transactions costs, then policies that reduce these transaction costs, such as road 
improvements, preferential terms for business expansion loans, and trade intelli-
gence systems for broadcasting prices to traders, for example, would yield savings 
that traders will pass on to farmers (in the form of higher prices) and consumers (in 
the form of lower prices). On the other hand, if traders are exercising a high degree 
of market power, gains from policies that reduce traders’ operating costs may be 
captured mostly by intermediaries. To meaningfully improve farmer and consumer 
welfare in this environment, policies may need to explicitly target enhanced compe-
tition among intermediaries.
In this paper, we present some of the first experimental evidence on the market 
structure in which African agricultural traders operate. To this end, we implement 
three randomized control trials that deliver new empirical evidence on the extent of 
cost ­pass-through, the shape of demand, and the effects of entry on market prices. 
We interpret these estimates in the context of a structural model and estimate the 
model of imperfect competition that best fits the data and its welfare implications.
In the first experiment, we exogenously reduce traders’ marginal costs by offer-
ing to all traders in a market a substantial, ­month-long subsidy per kg sold. We then 
observe how much of this reduction in costs is passed through to the price offered 
to consumers. We find that traders pass through only 22 percent of this reduction in 
costs to customers.
Nonetheless, the ­pass-through rate is insufficient to characterize imperfect com-
petition as the curvature of demand could produce lower ­pass-through rates, holding 
behavior of intermediaries constant. For example, the observed rate of ­pass-through 
could be consistent with a Cournot competitive market structure with highly con-
cave demand or with a perfectly collusive market structure with moderately concave 
demand. In order to distinguish between the roles played by intermediary conduct 
and consumer demand curvature, we run a second experiment to estimate the cur-
vature of demand. In this experiment, we offer consumers random reductions in 
price spanning a range of counterfactual ­pass-through rates and measure the result-
ing quantities purchased. This experimental variation in prices allows us to identify 
consumer demand without having to rely on strong identification assumptions. We 
specify and estimate a highly flexible demand function.
To determine agricultural intermediaries’ form of competition, we start with 
a simple model of demand and supply that nests Cournot competition and joint 
profit maximization. This model transparently maps the experimentally estimated 
­pass-through rate and demand curvature into inference about the form of compe-
tition. We find that traders are not competing: the estimated parameter governing 
how traders value other traders’ profits is statistically indistinguishable from that 
representing a perfectly collusive model in which traders form agreements (perhaps 


--- PAGE 3 ---
3707
BERGQUIST AND DINERSTEIN: COMPETITION AND ENTRY
VOL. 110 NO. 12
tacitly) about prices and act as a single ­profit-maximizing monopolist in the market. 
We can rule out Cournot competition with 95 percent confidence.
We then relax key assumptions in the simple model and estimate a more general 
model that allows for ­within-market trader heterogeneity and ­non-constant marginal 
costs, as well as an extensive margin to demand. We rely on the same experimental 
variation to identify the more general model, and introduce additional instruments 
describing how a trader’s choices in one market depend on experimental variation 
in the other markets in which he sells. These ­multi-market traders, and their expo-
sure to experimental variation across all of their markets, allow us to identify a 
­non-constant marginal cost function. Our estimates from the more general model 
again imply conduct consistent with joint profit maximization; as with the simple 
model, we can reject Cournot competition. Traders capture high markups, with the 
median trader earning a 39 percent markup. We also offer ­non-nested tests of joint 
profit maximization and Cournot competition that again point toward joint profit 
maximization as describing traders’ conduct.
Our third experiment generates exogenous entry by offering traders incentives to 
enter randomly selected markets for the first time. These results serve two purposes. 
First, we test whether policies that encourage market entry can decrease market 
power and promote competition. Second, traders’ willingness to accept the entry 
subsidies, the size of which is randomized, reveals how they trade off fixed costs 
versus variable profits, which enables us to estimate total trader profits and con-
duct a complete welfare analysis. We find that the entry subsidies induce an addi-
tional 0.6 traders per ­market-day on average, a 16 percent increase over the mean 
market size (and 21 percent over the median). These additional traders have only 
small impacts on price. We find that competition in markets in which entrants have 
no prior connections increases to a level that is statistically indistinguishable from 
Cournot competition, but that markets in which entrants have prior connections con-
tinue to be collusive. Entrants with no prior connections, however, are less willing to 
take up the entry offer, indicating that the most likely compliers from a policy aimed 
at increasing entry may not be effective in increasing competition.
We use this experimental variation to identify an entry model in which poten-
tial entrants decide to enter a market when their variable profits upon entry, which 
depend on marginal costs and the impact of entry on market competition, exceed 
their fixed costs, net of the experimental entry subsidy. Our estimates indicate that 
potential entrants have high fixed costs that are positively correlated with marginal 
costs. Extending the estimates to incumbent traders, we find that the median trader’s 
fixed costs constitute 71 percent of variable profits; the median (mean) trader keeps 
12 percent (25 percent) of revenues as profit, but the largest traders earn the highest 
markups, such that in the aggregate traders capture 82 percent of total surplus, while 
consumers capture just 18 percent.
We use our estimated demand, ­quantity-setting, and entry models to solve for 
counterfactual equilibria were traders to engage in Cournot competition. We esti-
mate that switching from joint profit maximization to Cournot competition would 
have large effects on surplus division, as consumer surplus would triple and dead-
weight loss would fall by one-third.
This paper is one of the first to experimentally test the competition model of rural 
agricultural markets directly. Previous attempts to measure competition or market 


--- PAGE 4 ---
3708
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
DECEMBER 2020
efficiency have mainly relied on observational methods. Observational studies have 
typically found high rates of ­pass-through across major markets (Rashid and Minot 
2010), though these high transmission rates may not extend beyond major urban 
markets (Moser, Barrett, and Minten 2009). Moreover, interpretation of this observa-
tional evidence is confounded by common shocks such as shared harvest times and 
reverse flows across seasons. One exception to this primarily observational literature 
is a recent paper by Casaburi and Reed (2016), which studies the effect of an experi-
mental subsidy per unit purchased by cocoa traders in Sierra Leone. They find small 
­pass-through in terms of price, but larger ­pass-through in credit, suggesting the impor-
tance of interlinked relationships in their context (a feature not relevant in the Kenyan 
maize markets we study, in which over 95 percent of transactions are conducted in 
cash).1
Another set of papers attempts to directly measure traders’ profits in order to draw 
inference about the size of rents and model of competition. These have generally found 
that average trader profits are moderately large, though subject to significant variabil-
ity, leaving a question mark on whether these returns represent rents or risk premia 
(Dillon and Dambro 2016). Moreover, these direct measures are subject to potentially 
severe measurement error in the face of ­difficult-to-quantify search, own labor, and 
fixed costs, as well as a general lack of record keeping (Fafchamps, Gabre-Madhin, 
and Minten 2005).2 The sensitivity of directly asking about profits in an environment 
in which traders are often labeled as exploitative presents a further challenge.
Finally, a set of papers has applied experimental methods to the somewhat related 
question of the impact of offering price information to farmers on their ability to 
extract better prices from traders. While most studies find null results (Fafchamps 
and Minten 2012, Mitra et al. 2015),3 it is unclear if this suggests traders are already 
offering competitive prices given their costs or whether farmers are simply unable 
to use this information to improve their bargaining position. There is therefore a 
paucity of causal evidence on how traders compete (Dillon and Dambro 2016) 
despite a growing interest in the role these intermediaries play in determining the 
allocation of gains from trade (Antràs and Costinot 2011; Bardhan, Mookherjee, 
and Tsumagari 2013).4
More broadly, this paper follows a long literature on testing among different 
models of competition. We follow Nevo (2001) and Miller and Weinberg (2017), 
among many others, in testing among common models of competition nested in a 
single framework. We also implement ­non-nested tests of joint profit ­maximization 
and Cournot competition in the spirit of Berry and Haile (2014) and similar to 
1 Because their subsidy is offered only to a subset of traders in the market, Casaburi and Reed (2016) must ulti-
mately rely on observational estimates of ­pass-through to measure the form of competition, as their experimental 
estimates appear to be affected by ­within-market spillovers. Further, in the absence of evidence on the shape of 
farmer supply, they are forced to make strong linearity assumptions. Because the curvature of the market facing 
traders (farmer supply in their case, consumer demand in ours) is crucial to interpreting the ­pass-through rate, we 
experimentally estimate this curvature.
2 Only 58 percent of traders in our sample keep any written records and, among this group, most records are 
fairly rudimentary.
3 The exception is Hildebrandt et al. (2015), which finds that farmers who receive price information earn 5 per-
cent higher prices for their yams, but this effect disappears by the second year of the study.
4 In a ­quasi-experimental variant of this literature, Casaburi, Glennerster, and Suri (2013) find that expansion of 
the road network in Sierra Leone led to price decreases that can be best explained under a search cost framework, 
and which are inconsistent with either Bertrand competition or Cournot oligopsony.


--- PAGE 5 ---
3709
BERGQUIST AND DINERSTEIN: COMPETITION AND ENTRY
VOL. 110 NO. 12
Backus, Conlon, and Sinkinson (2019a), which avoids some of the issues with the 
nested approach. To identify the form of competition, we rely on an experimen-
tal cost shock. This idea of identifying and quantifying deviations from perfect 
competition using ­pass-through rates dates back to Sumner (1981), who used cost 
variation from cigarette excise taxes. Sullivan (1985) and Ashenfelter and Sullivan 
(1987) also used excise tax ­pass-through, while the trade literature has leveraged 
exchange rate ­pass-through (Feenstra 1989, Knetter 1989, Aw 1993, Goldberg 
1995, Goldberg and Knetter 1999).5 Bulow and Pfleiderer (1983) clarified the role 
of demand functional form in inferring competition from ­pass-through, and more 
recent contributions to the literature on ­pass-through include Weyl and Fabinger 
(2013) and Atkin and Donaldson (2015). Unlike many of these papers, we use 
experimental variation to identify the model components, adding to the recent lit-
erature using experimentally estimated parameters to understand market structure 
in developing countries (Keniston 2011).
This paper proceeds as follows. Section I describes maize markets in Kenya. 
Section  II introduces a general and simplified theoretical supply and demand 
model. These motivate the experimental design, which we describe in greater detail 
in Section III. Section IV presents results on ­pass-through and demand, and then 
uses these estimates to identify the form of competition within the simple model. 
Section  V relaxes some of the simple model’s assumptions and presents results 
from the more general model. Section VI describes results of the entry experiment 
and estimation of an entry model that we use to quantify welfare in Section VII. 
Section VIII concludes.
I.  Maize Markets in Kenya
Staple commodities represent a major expenditure for consumers across Africa. 
In Kenya, maize, the country’s primary staple commodity, is responsible for over 
one-third of average gross caloric intake. The median household spends 9 percent of 
its annual expenditure on maize (and the poorest decile spends 14 percent). On the 
production side, about one-half of all Kenyan households grows maize (Argent and 
Begazo 2015). The functionality of these staple commodity markets is therefore of 
significant importance for household welfare.
Online Appendix Figure A.1 displays the maize output market chain in western 
Kenya. Regional traders, the subjects of this study, are responsible for ­large-scale 
aggregation, storage, and transportation. They report purchasing 50 percent of their 
maize from ­small-medium farmers (selling ​<​ 5 tons), 16 percent from large farmers 
(selling ​≥​ 5 tons), and 33 percent from other traders. They buy primarily from coun-
ties throughout western Kenya and neighboring regions in eastern Uganda (the latter 
is more common during the lean season, when local supply is scarce in Kenya).6 
Traders tend to own a warehouse in a market center and either rent or own a truck 
which they use to purchase maize, bring it back to their warehouse for sorting, 
drying, and ­repackaging, and then carry it onward to their destination of sale. In 
5 Relatedly, Panzar and Rosse (1987) developed predictions based on ­pass-through of cost shocks into revenues.
6 Due to differences in crop calendars, farmers in eastern Uganda harvest maize several months earlier than 
those in western Kenya.


--- PAGE 6 ---
3710
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
DECEMBER 2020
our sample, 64 percent of sales take place in ­open-air markets in rural communi-
ties. Sixteen ­percent is sold to millers, who grind maize into flour for sale to stores 
that serve urban consumers. Another 16 percent is sold to other traders, who sell in 
other areas of Kenya or eastern Uganda. A small portion of sales, about 2 percent, 
is sold to restaurants, schools, and other institutions. Finally, 2 percent is sold to 
the Kenyan National Cereals and Produce Board, the former state maize marketing 
board that still has limited involvement in the market by purchasing, storing, and 
selling small reserves of maize with a goal of stabilizing prices.
A. Entry into Regional Trade
As part of a broad plan of structural adjustment in the 1980s and 1990s, Kenya 
pulled ­state-controlled marketing boards out of staple grain markets, lifted trade 
restrictions on export crops, and allowed prices to be determined by market forces, 
rather than by state mandate. Today, few legal barriers exist to entering the maize 
trade.7 However, engaging in ­large-scale, regional wholesale trade still requires 
significant working capital in order to pay for inventory, storage facilities,8 and 
transport vehicles.9 Further, traders must develop extensive networks of contacts 
in order to glean information on prices and product availability, as this information 
is disseminated ­one-on-one through personal networks of fellow traders rather than 
through any centralized or open information clearinghouse. It is common for traders 
to enter the business with the support of siblings, spouses, or even former employers 
who already have experience in the business. Therefore, while entry is close to free 
legally, those who wish to enter regional trade still face significant barriers.
Online Appendix Table A.1 presents trader demographic details. The average trader 
has completed some secondary school and is able to answer one-half of the Ravens 
matrices (Group B) questions. Only 58 percent keep written records, which typically 
include only sale prices and quantities; rarely are cost or accounting data recorded. 
However, 62 percent do report reviewing their financial strength monthly. Most trad-
ers operate ­one-man businesses, with only 37 percent having any employees.
B. Open Air Markets
This study takes place in the open air markets in which traders sell the majority 
of their produce. These markets typically occur on a set day each week. The traders 
present are a mix of those who have their warehouse in that particular market and 
those who arrive with a truck and sell out of its back for the day. Traders with trucks 
typically park next to each other in a particular area that they use each week, and 
7 The few permits that are required are either easy to obtain or are unenforced. The primary license required is 
the Annual County Business License, which costs about US$100/year and is issued by county officials. Traders 
report this license is easy to get and most have this license (though most also report that this license is not ­well 
enforced). Other licenses are very poorly enforced, if at all, including a public health license and a transport permit. 
There are more serious inspections and permits required for ­cross-border trade. Finally, there is a small US$2 “cess” 
tax charged to traders in the market each day.
8 Though ­long-term storage is uncommon among traders, short-run facilities are necessary for cleaning, drying, 
and sorting.
9 For example, rental of a truck per day costs $250 (about 18 percent of annual GDP per capita), while purchas-
ing a truck costs $30,000 (over 21x annual GDP per capita).


--- PAGE 7 ---
3711
BERGQUIST AND DINERSTEIN: COMPETITION AND ENTRY
VOL. 110 NO. 12
warehouses are typically in a row or clustered. Importantly, trader prices, while 
not posted in any public way, are presumably common knowledge given the close 
physical proximity of traders. Online Appendix Figure A.2 presents the histogram 
of the number of traders per market, which varies from ­1–10 with a median of 3. 
Traders commonly work in the same set of markets each week, with 96 percent 
of traders reporting working in that market most weeks and only 1 percent say-
ing that this was their first time in the market (see Online Appendix Table A.1). 
Seventy-seven percent have worked previously with all other traders in the mar-
ket that day. As a result, 68 percent say they know the other traders in the mar-
ket that day “very well,” 26 percent “somewhat well,” and only 6 percent “not 
very well.” When asked directly, only 38 percent of traders report “discussing a 
good price” with other traders and only 30 percent report engaging in an explicit 
price agreement with other traders; the vast majority claim they are rigorously 
competing on price. However, 72 percent of traders work in a market in which 
at least one trader has reported the existence of a price agreement that day. Most 
(83 percent) traders visit only one of our 60 sample markets during the ­12-week 
experimental period, though ­multi-market traders visit an average of 2.7 markets.
Customers in these markets are comprised of ­two-thirds individual households 
and ­one-third rural retailers. The median consumer buys maize only from her local 
market, though a few retailers purchase from a larger number. We therefore model 
consumers as considering one local market.10 The median customer buys maize for 
consumption every week; storage is rare (see online Appendix C.1). The product 
itself is fairly homogeneous (see online Appendix C.2).
II.  Theoretical Framework
The experimental design employed in this study is tightly tied to theory. In this 
section, we introduce a model of supply and demand for a homogeneous product, 
starting with a general model with limited assumptions. We then offer a simpli-
fied version of this model which demonstrates that, with the addition of a few key 
assumptions, a parameter nesting models of competition is a function of a small 
number of sufficient statistics. These sufficient statistics form the basis for the 
experimental design, with each of the three experiments implemented here designed 
to identify a specific parameter. Experiment 1 identifies ­pass-through, while 
Experiment 2 identifies the curvature of demand. We use these two estimates to 
infer the model of competition that best describes how traders operate. In Section V, 
we relax these simplifying assumptions and return to estimating the more general 
model, still relying on the experimental variation for identification. We then return 
to the third experiment, where the number of traders in the market is experimentally 
­manipulated, and estimate the effect on how traders compete. Figure 1 provides an 
overview of how the experiments map to theory.
10 Consistent with this, we find that the nearest market is on average 8km away (7km for the median market). On 
the same day, the nearest active market is 22km away (17km for the median market). Data on consumer behavior 
are drawn from a phone survey with 165 consumers randomly selected from the demand experiment sample. This 
survey was conducted in July and August 2016 immediately following data collection for the main experiment. In 
online Appendix H we find some evidence of substitution from markets outside of our sample into markets in our 
sample and discuss how this might affect our results.


--- PAGE 8 ---
3712
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
DECEMBER 2020
A. Model ­Setup
We begin with a model of demand and supply of a homogeneous good.11 
11 Whether the product is differentiated matters for how we infer the form of competition from equilibrium 
prices and quantities, as the same equilibrium responses to shocks could be consistent with one model of competi-
tion under homogeneous products and a different model of competition under differentiated products. However, the 
Panel A. Experiments
Panel B. Simple model
Panel C. General model
Cost shock
• Marginal costs*
• Price
• Marginal costs in multimarket
  traders’ other markets*
• Pass-through
• Demand (quantity response)
• MC slope
Entry
• Size of fixed payment to enter*
• Number new traders in market
• Fixed costs of entry
• Effect of entry on competition
Demand
• Price*
• Demand (quantity response)
* = directly manipulated
  
ρ mw ≡   ∂P mw  
____ 
 ∂c mw   =   {1 +   1 +  E mw  
_____ 
 N mw   (1 + ω ( N mw − 1) ) }    
−1
 
Identified by
cost shock
experiment
Calculated from demand model
(identified by cost shock and
demand experiments)
Identified by
demand
experiment
Observed
in data
Observed
in data
Manipulated by
cost shock
experiment
Profit weight
 P mw −  c mw +    ∂P mw  
____ 
∂ q jmw   q jmw = −ω    ∂P mw  
____ 
 ∂q jmw     ∑ 
k≠j
 
 
  q kmw    
+   γq jw +   
c j    
+   c m    
+   c w    
+   c jmw
   
Identified by instruments: 
• Mean treatment status
  in other markets
• Entry offer
• Cost shock low
• Cost shock high
Experiment
Exogenous variation
Used to identify
Figure 1. Experimental Design
Notes: Panel A lays out the experiments, the exogenous variation driven by each experiment, and the objects iden-
tified by said exogenous variation. Panel B and panel C lay out the main identifying equations for the simple and 
general model, respectively, and how each component is identified.


--- PAGE 9 ---
3713
BERGQUIST AND DINERSTEIN: COMPETITION AND ENTRY
VOL. 110 NO. 12
Household ​i​, in week ​w​ and its local market ​m​, demands ​​q​imw​(​P​mw​)​  ≥  0​ kilograms 
of maize at market price ​​P​mw​​. Given the set ​​​mw​​ households in local market ​m​ in 
week ​w​, market demand is ​​Q​mw​(​P​mw​)​  =  ​∑ i∈​​mw​​ 
  
​ ​q​imw​(​P​mw​)​​ with corresponding 
inverse market demand ​​P​mw​(​Q​mw​)​​. Traders choose quantities for each market they 
visit each week to maximize weekly profits.12 We write trader ​j​’s maximization 
problem as13
(1)	
​​  max​ 
​{​q​jmw​}​m∈​​jw​​​ ​π​jmw​ = ​ ∑ 
m∈​​jw​
​ 
 
  ​ ​P​mw​(​q​jmw​)​ ​q​jmw​ − ​C​jw​(​q​j1w​, … , ​q​jMw​)​
	
+  ω​
[
​ ∑ 
m∈​​jw​
​ 
 
  ​ ​∑ 
k≠j
​ 
 
 ​ ​P​mw​(​q​jmw​)​ ​q​kmw​ − ​∑ 
k≠j
​ 
 
 ​ ​C​kw​(​q​j1w​, … , ​q​jMw​)​
]
​​,
where ​​​jw​​ is the set of markets ​j​ visits in week ​w​ and ​​C​jw​​ is ​j​’s total costs in week ​w​ 
across all markets. The second set of terms in brackets, multiplied by ​ω​, captures 
other traders’ profits in the same markets. Therefore ​ω  ∈  ​[0, 1]​​ serves as a profit 
weight summarizing how a trader internalizes the profits of other traders in his mar-
ket, with ​ω  =  0​ reducing to Cournot and ​ω  =  1​ reflecting joint profit maximiza-
tion.14 Taking the derivative of equation (1) with respect to the trader’s quantity ​​q​jmw​​ 
in market ​m​ in week ​w​ yields the trader’s first-order condition:
(2)	
​​P​mw​  =  ​ ∂ ​C​jw​ 
_ 
∂ ​q​jmw​ ​ − ​ ∂ ​P​mw​ 
_ 
∂ ​q​jmw​ ​(​q​jmw​ + ω ​∑ 
k≠j
​ 
 
 ​ ​q​kmw​)​​,
where ​ω  =  0​ and ​ω  =  1​ reduce this to the familiar Cournot and monopoly first 
order conditions, respectively.
We will estimate a parametric form of this general model in Section V. But to 
highlight how our experiments can directly identify the model of competition, we 
first offer a complementary simplified version of the model that reduces inference 
weight of evidence suggests maize sold in these markets is fairly homogeneous. There is little variation in quality, 
price, or other dimensions of the sale (e.g., credit is rarely used). See online Appendix C.2 for further detail. Price 
discrimination also appears quite limited, with an ­intra-cluster correlation of 0.9 between the prices that a trader 
offers his various customers throughout the day (see online Appendix C.3). This is likely because negotiations 
between traders and consumers are conducted in public, thereby limiting traders’ ability to engage in dramatic price 
discrimination. We therefore assume a single market price.
12 Specifying a weekly cost function allows for the possibility that the subset of traders active in multiple 
­in-sample markets in the same week may have cost interdependencies across markets.
13 The model employed here is static. While maize is in theory storable, empirically, consumer stockpiling is 
quite limited (see online Appendix Section C.1). Related work in the region suggests that credit constraints limit 
households’ ability to arbitrage these price fluctuations (Burke, Bergquist, and Miguel 2019).
14 Under this formulation, ​ω​ can be interpreted structurally, with traders directly valuing the profits of other 
traders, or as a parameter summarizing conduct. For the structural interpretation, the literature has focused on cases 
where there is a common claimant on agents’ profits (e.g., vertically integrated units in Crawford et al. 2018 or 
firms with common investors in Backus, Conlon, and Sinkinson 2019b). In our setting, there are several features 
that could motivate a structural interpretation of the profit weight. Specifically, the structural profit weight encom-
passes relevant cases including traders from the same extended family, altruism toward fellow traders, and social 
insurance. If we proceed without a structural interpretation, the profit weight has no direct interpretation outside 
of ​ω  =  0​ and ​ω  =  1​. Fan and Sullivan (2018) derive a profit weight model consistent with a set of supergames, 
though they point out an additional term capturing rivals’ deviation profits is necessary. We therefore primarily 
employ ​ω​ as a convenient formulation for nesting the two ­well-defined model of competition for which we will test 
empirically in our experiment. We also provide a direct ­non-nested test of Cournot and joint profit maximization. 
Finally, while versions of the reduced form approach can bias estimates toward too much competitiveness if the 
traders are colluding at a price below the monopoly price (Corts 1999), our empirical estimates in Section V indi-
cate joint profit maximization.


--- PAGE 10 ---
3714
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
DECEMBER 2020
about the model of competition to a few statistics. This relies on two simplifying 
assumptions. First, consistent with Fafchamps, Gabre-Madhin, and Minten (2005), 
we assume marginal costs (​​c​jmw​  =  ∂ ​C​jw​​ / ∂ ​q​jmw​​) are constant with respect to quan-
tities. This appears to be a good approximation of the empirical setting, in which 
the major variable costs are constant with respect to quantity (see online Appendix 
Section D). In the general model, we will relax this assumption (though estimates 
do suggest costs are fairly flat). Second, we assume symmetry across traders in a 
­market-week, specifically with respect to marginal cost (​​c​jmw​  =  ​c​mw​​). Again, we 
will relax this assumption in the general model.
Given these assumptions, our first order condition reduces to
(3)	
​​P​mw​  =  ​c​mw​ − ​(1 + ω​(​N​mw​ − 1)​)​ ​ ∂ ​P​mw​ 
_ 
∂ ​Q​mw​ ​ ​ ​Q​mw​ 
_ 
​N​mw​ ​​,
where ​​N​mw​​ is the number of traders in the market ​m​ and week ​w​. The term ​ω​ contin-
ues to nest Cournot competition and full collusion.15 We see that equilibrium mark-
ups depend on the shape of demand and two features of market structure and trader 
behavior: the number of traders ​​N​mw​​ and whether these traders interact according to 
Cournot competition (​ω  =  0​) or joint profit maximization (​ω  =  1​).
B. ­Pass-Through and Demand Curvature
In the first part of the paper, we use two experiments, one identifying ­pass-through 
and one identifying consumer demand, to estimate ​ω​ in the observed market 
equilibria.16
Our first experiment estimates ­pass-through by experimentally reducing traders’ 
marginal costs. To link this to the model, we take the derivative of equation (3) with 
respect to ​​c​mw​​, which yields
(4)	
​​ρ​mw​  ≡  ​ ∂ ​P​mw​ 
_ 
∂ ​c​mw​ ​  =  ​{1 + ​ 1 + ​E​mw​ 
_ 
​N​mw​  ​(1 + ω​(​N​mw​ − 1)​)​}​ 
−1
​​,
where ​​E​mw​  ≡  ​(​Q​mw​ / ​(∂ ​P​mw​​ / ∂ ​Q​mw​)​)​(∂ ​(∂ ​P​mw​ / ∂ ​Q​mw​)​ / ∂ ​Q​mw​)​​ is the elasticity of the 
slope of inverse demand. Under the specific models of competition tested here, this 
equation reduces to
(5)	
​​ρ​mw​  =  ​
⎧
 
⎪
 
⎨ 
⎪ 
⎩
​​{1 + ​ 1 + ​E​mw​ 
_ 
​N​mw​  ​}​ 
−1
​​ when Cournot competitive ​ 
 
 
 
​{2 + ​E​mw​}​ −1​
​ 
when collusive.
 
​​
15 This equation also nests the solution to the Bertrand ­price-setting model, with ​ω  =  − 1 / ​(​N​mw​ − 1)​​. We will 
not focus on this case, but point out that because Bertrand competition implies a negative ​ω​, rejecting Cournot with 
a positive point estimate also implies rejecting Bertrand.
16 We will use experimental variation across markets to estimate ​ω​. This relies on the additional assumption that 
all sample markets operate under the same form of competition. In addition to being necessary for statistical power, 
this assumption also reflects the case in which ­multi-market contact leads traders to make potentially coordinated 
decisions at a level above the market. We are also assuming that the treatment itself, which will be a cost shock, does 
not change ​ω​. The shock is unlikely to introduce any unfamiliar traders to the market. We investigate this further in 
online Appendix Section I, where we find a very small, marginally significant effect that is likely to bias us toward 
Cournot competition. We relax this assumption when studying entry and allow ​ω​ to vary with whether traders have 
connections to each other.


--- PAGE 11 ---
3715
BERGQUIST AND DINERSTEIN: COMPETITION AND ENTRY
VOL. 110 NO. 12
Therefore, the level of ­pass-through ​​ρ​mw​​ depends on the competitive structure of 
markets (​ω​ = 0 or ​ω  =  1​) and the curvature of demand ​​E​mw​​ (as well as on the 
number of traders ​​N​mw​​ in the Cournot model).17
Accordingly, our first experiment identifies ­pass-through and our second exper-
iment identifies demand curvature. We then insert these experimentally estimated 
parameters into equation (4) from the sufficient statistics model and back out the 
profit weight ​ω​ in these markets. In Section V, we will estimate ​ω​ in the more general 
model that relaxes the assumptions of constant marginal cost and symmetric traders. 
Finally, we provide a direct ­non-nested test of Cournot and joint profit maximization 
that does not depend on specifying a continuous parameter that nests Cournot com-
petition and joint profit maximization.
C. The Effect of Entry on Competition
A commonly prescribed policy intervention to increase market competition is 
to encourage entry by new market participants. In the second part of this paper, we 
evaluate the impact of such policies and estimate whether the model of competition 
responds to changes in the number or identity of market participants. We then use 
these entry decisions to estimate a structural model of entry into a market. These 
estimates let us quantify the distribution of trader fixed costs and allow us to conduct 
counterfactual exercises where trader participation responds endogenously to the 
form of competition.
III.  Experimental Design
A. Sample Selection and Experimental Schedule
The sample of markets in this study is drawn from six counties in Western Kenya. 
A listing exercise was conducted with the Director of Trade in each county to get a 
comprehensive list of all markets in the county. Markets without maize traders and 
urban markets in town centers were then excluded. See online Appendix Section E 
for additional details on the sample selection procedure.
The two ­market-level experiments (cost shock and entry) were each run for four 
weeks in a row. This time spans about one-quarter of the full selling season in the 
region (March to July). This duration of treatment was selected to represent a rel-
atively ­long-run cost or entry shock. It was also selected to match the frequency at 
which prices regularly vary to minimize concerns about sticky prices (see Figure 2). 
Because piloting revealed that market and week fixed effects were important (cut-
ting standard errors almost in half), the experiment was designed to provide each 
market each treatment status (cost shock treatment, entry treatment, and control) in 
a random order to allow for the inclusion of these fixed effects. Online Appendix 
Figure E.1 shows the six possible orders.18 Each ­four-week block was broken by a 
­one-week break during which the demand experiment was run in a subset of markets.
17 Under Bertrand competition, ​​ρ​mw​  =  1​
18 This randomization was first blocked by the day of the week of the market (done primarily for logistical ease 
as the trader ­cost-shock and entry treatment required additional management time to facilitate payments, and equal 


--- PAGE 12 ---
3716
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
DECEMBER 2020
B. Experiment 1: Trader Cost Shock Experiment
In treatment ­market-days for the trader cost shock experiment, all traders in the 
market were offered a subsidy per kg sold. Enumerators arrived at the market at 
7:30am (prior to the market start) and immediately made the offer to every trader 
present. Any traders who arrived later were also presented with the offer immedi-
ately upon arrival. Enumerators stayed in the market until 5:00pm (after the market 
conclusion). Maize sold during the enumerators’ presence in the market was eligible 
for the subsidy.19 When introducing the subsidy, enumerators first asked the trader 
to describe some of the major costs that he faced in his business (traders in control 
market days were also asked these questions, to avoid confounding treatment with 
any priming effects). The subsidy was then framed as a reduction of these costs. 
At no point were traders told that the purpose of the subsidy was to see how much 
would be passed on to the prices they set for customers; rather they were told the 
research was interested generally in how “reductions in cost affect your business.”
In the first week, traders were informed that the offer would be available for four 
weeks. An identical script was read in each subsequent week to remind returning 
traders of the availability of the subsidy and to make the offer to any new traders 
distribution of treatment across days of the week ensured an even flow of management duties) and then stratified 
by the number of traders typically in the market, as identified in the market census. See online Appendix Section E 
for further details on this census.
19 Only maize sold in cash was eligible for the subsidy due to concerns about the ability of enumerators to verify 
the authenticity of credit sales. However, over 95 percent of sales are conducted in cash, so this restriction was often 
irrelevant. The subsidy was capped at the first 75 90kg bags sold to limit budget exposure, but this cap was binding 
for only 1.5 percent of traders.
25
30
35
Price/Kg
March
April
May
June
Figure 2. Maize Prices in Study Markets
Notes: Gray lines show the price for each market over the ­12-week study period. The black line shows the average 
price across markets.


--- PAGE 13 ---
3717
BERGQUIST AND DINERSTEIN: COMPETITION AND ENTRY
VOL. 110 NO. 12
who were absent in the previous week. All traders in the market therefore received 
an identical reduction in their marginal costs.
The 60 markets in the sample were divided into two groups: 45 markets received 
a “low” subsidy level of 200Ksh/90kg bag when they were in the cost shock treat-
ment and 15 markets received a “high” subsidy level of 400Ksh/90kg bag (sales of 
partial bags were eligible at the same prorated amount). Note that “low” and “high” 
are merely relative titles: both represent large and meaningful changes to traders’ 
costs. The “low” subsidy rate represents 7.5 percent of the average price, while the 
“high” subsidy represents 15 percent of the average price. Payments were made via 
mobile money twice a day. See online Appendix Section J.1 for additional details 
about this experiment.
Enumerators monitored the sales of each trader throughout the day, recording 
the price and other details of each transaction as will be described below in the data 
section. The data collection process was identical in treatment and control markets.
C. Experiment 2: Demand Experiment
In the demand experiment, customers were first allowed to approach traders 
and negotiate a price and quantity in a natural way before being approached by 
an enumerator to invite them to the demand experiment.20 If the customer con-
sented, a random discount amount was drawn (using a randomization feature within 
SurveyCTO) and the customer was told that the price he had previously received 
from the trader would be reduced by that amount. The customer was then invited to 
select a new quantity he would like to purchase in light of this new price. The price 
discount was given to the customer in the form of a mobile money or cash transfer, 
and the customer paid the trader the originally negotiated price.
Traders’ consent was acquired at the beginning of each day. The trader was there-
fore aware that his customers would (potentially) receive price reductions. While 
this may have changed the baseline price charged by the trader (e.g., the trader may 
have raised his overall price to collect some of the anticipated discount), the trader 
did not know at the time of price negotiation with any one consumer the amount of 
the discount that would be offered nor was the trader permitted to adjust the price 
following the announcement of the realized discount amount. Therefore, any varia-
tion in price driven by the discount is random.
Discounts were given per kg purchased (so as to lower the price/kg). Ten 
levels of discounts were offered, calibrated to span the range of price reduc-
tions one would have observed if ­0–100 percent of the ­cost-reduction subsidy 
had been ­passed-through in the cost shock experiment. Per 90kg bag, they were: 
{0, 25, 50, 100, 150, 200, 250, 300, 350, 400} Ksh. See online Appendix Section J.2 
for additional details about this experiment.
20 The sample is therefore drawn from consumers who were already planning on purchasing maize that day. 
This was done out of necessity, in order to identify a pool of “customers” in which to randomize the discount 
amount. However, it does mean that the sample does not include customers who may have been induced on the 
extensive margin into market participation at these lower, discounted prices. The assumption therefore in the suffi-
cient statistics model is that these customers would have exhibited the same curvature of demand as the customers 
observed in the sample. For the general empirical model, we directly model the extensive margin and identify 
substitution on the extensive margin using results from the trader cost shock experiment.


--- PAGE 14 ---
3718
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
DECEMBER 2020
D. Experiment 3: Entry Experiment
In the entry experiment, traders who had never before worked in the treated mar-
ket were offered subsidies to enter and attempt to sell there. Three traders were 
given the offer for each market. This was designed (i) to increase the probability that 
at least one trader took up the offer and (ii) to measure traders’ willingness to enter, 
as the amount of each offer was randomized. Offers were given for four weeks in a 
row to generate somewhat ­long-run entry.
The pool of traders eligible to receive the entry offers was drawn from the sam-
ple of traders interviewed in pilot work (traders from markets in the same region in 
Kenya) and the universe of all traders found during the market census activity. Small 
traders who did not own or regularly rent trucks were then excluded from the pool as 
pilot work showed that these traders categorically did not take up the offer. A phone 
survey was conducted with the remaining 187 traders to determine markets in which 
they had ever worked. For each of the 60 sample markets, we then identified the set 
of eligible traders who (i) had never before worked in that market and (ii) did not 
work in other study markets that occur on the same day of the week in order to avoid 
inducing exit in our sample. The median market had 37 eligible traders, the mini-
mum had 28, and the maximum had 56. From each of these sets, we then randomly 
selected the three traders who would receive the entry offers.
Once the set of offers was established, each of the three selected traders for each 
market was randomized into a “low” offer of 5,000Ksh (US$49), a “medium” offer 
of 10,000Ksh (US$99), and a “high” offer of 15,000Ksh (US$148). The trader was 
eligible to receive this amount each time he visited the entry market on any of four 
offer days.21 Payout was contingent on a few factors, of which traders were made 
aware during the offer call. They were that the trader must (i) come to the specified 
market on the specified date; (ii) arrive with a truck and at least 15 bags; (iii) stay for 
at least one hour and show intention to attempt sales. Payment was made via mobile 
money immediately after these conditions were met.
Traders were informed of the offer via phone call one week prior to the first 
­market-day for which they were eligible. During this call, a short survey was 
conducted to gather additional information about the potential entrant, including 
whether he had contacts in the market, his expected profits for the day should he 
take up and not take up the offer respectively, and his ethnicity. Following each offer 
week, a short ­follow-up phone survey was conducted, in which information was 
collected about the trader’s activities on the day of the offer regardless of whether 
he accepted the offer. See online Appendix Section J.3 for additional details about 
this experiment.
E. Data
Data were collected in an identical way in all markets and in all periods (cost 
shock treatment, entry treatment, and control). Depending on the activity level of 
21 Traders were encouraged to attend all four days to receive four payouts of the amounts above. Offers for each 
day were independent because making payouts contingent on perfect attendance could have potentially discouraged 
overall ­take-up.


--- PAGE 15 ---
3719
BERGQUIST AND DINERSTEIN: COMPETITION AND ENTRY
VOL. 110 NO. 12
each market, enumerators were assigned to monitor 1–4 traders.22 Those surveys 
captured ­transaction-level price, quantity, payment method (cash or credit), and cus-
tomer type (individual household consumer or retailer), all observed in ­real-time by 
the enumerator. Data on the value of any ­nontraditional reductions in price were also 
collected. These included: flat reductions in the total cost of the purchase (rather 
than in the ­per-unit price); “­top-ups,” quantities of maize added to the total purchase 
“for free”; and “­after-bag services,” such as free sacks, transport, or other services 
given to customers bundled with their transactions. The value of these additional 
services is incorporated into the price per kg.23 Maize quality data were also col-
lected for each trader (see online Appendix Section C.2 for greater detail). In addi-
tion, traders were asked about their experience with other traders in the market that 
day: how often they had worked with others before, how well they knew others, 
whether they had “discussed a good price” at which to sell, and whether they had 
“agreed on a price” at which to sell.24 Finally, the first time a trader was met in the 
sample, additional information was captured on the trader’s fixed characteristics, 
including ethnicity, location of home market, highest level of education achieved, 
and a battery of business management and record keeping questions drawn from 
McKenzie and Woodruff (2015). A Raven’s test was also administered.
IV.  Estimating the Form of Competition in Simple Empirical Model
In this section we estimate the elements, or sufficient statistics, that enter equa-
tion (4) in the simplified model. We start by estimating ­pass-through and then turn to 
the curvature of demand. We end by backing out the implied model of competition.
A. ­Pass-Through
To measure ­pass-through, we estimate
(6)	
​​P​jmw​  =  βC​C​mw​ + ​γ​w​ + ​ζ​m​ + ​ϵ​jmw​​,
where ​​P​jmw​​ is trader ​j​’s ­quantity-weighted average price in market ​m​ and 
week ​w​,25​C​C​mw​​ is the level of cost change per kg offered in market ​m​ on week ​w​ 
(i.e., CC is the negative value of the marginal cost subsidy in cost shock treatment 
markets and zero elsewhere, such that ​C​C​mw​​ = {0 Ksh, −200 Ksh, −400 Ksh}), 
and ​​γ​w​​ and ​​ζ​m​​ are week and market fixed effects, respectively, included to improve 
22 Busier markets with more quickly moving sales were allocated additional enumerators to ensure that all 
transactions could be recorded with accuracy.
23 These ­nontraditional reductions in price were uncommon, but they do add 1–2 percentage points to our esti-
mate of ­pass-through, so there is some indication that traders can use these ­less-traditional methods of price reduc-
tions to ­pass through some of the cost reduction. It is possible that this is a more discreet method of deviating from 
price agreements maintained with fellow traders. It may also help traders to make price changes more continuous 
(as prices otherwise typically change in increments of 50 Ksh/bag or 5 Ksh/goro, a 2.2kg tin).
24 Due to their sensitivity, these questions were asked at ­mid-day, after the enumerator had established good 
rapport with the respondent. For any traders who left the market before that time, enumerators attempted to ask 
these questions before the trader left, but these efforts occasionally failed due to short notice. As a result, there is 
higher attrition among this section of the survey.
25 Because the ICC of price within a trader in a given ­market-day is high (0.9), in practice there is little variation 
in the prices entering into this average.


--- PAGE 16 ---
3720
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
DECEMBER 2020
precision. The sample includes traders in ­market-days in which the market was in 
either the cost shock treatment or control period: market days assigned to the entry 
treatment are omitted. Under this specification, the coefficient of interest is ​β​, which 
yields the ­pass-through rate, or ​∂ P / ∂ c​. Throughout we cluster standard errors by 
­market-block, the unit of randomization, and weight the regressions by the inverse 
number of traders in the market to give equal weight to each market.
To measure heterogeneity in the ­pass-through rate by the level of the cost change, 
we estimate
(7)	
​​P​jmw​  =  ​β​1​ C​C​mw​ × Lo​w​mw​ + ​β​2​ C​C​mw​ × Hig​h​mw​ + ​γ​w​ + ​ζ​m​ + ​ϵ​jmw​​,
in which ​Lo​w​mw​​ (​Hig​h​mw​​) is a dummy indicating whether the market was in a low 
(high) subsidy market. This allows for ­nonlinearities in the effect of the subsidy per 
kg. For other measures of heterogeneity, we run specifications similar to equation 
(7), conditioning on the desired dimension of heterogeneity.
Table 1 presents the main results of the ­pass-through experiment. In column 1, we 
see that ­pass-through is 22.4 percent, significantly different from zero at the 1 percent 
level and measured with a high degree of precision. Column 2 presents ­pass-through 
rates for low and high cost reduction treatments separately. The ­pass-through rates 
for each group are almost identical. This constant empirical ­pass-through rate will 
help inform the functional form assumptions in the following section  on demand 
estimation.
We explore heterogeneity by the number of traders in the market.26 Figure 3 
presents these results, which show little evidence of meaningful heterogeneity. 
26 This is the main source of heterogeneity ­prespecified in a design registry submitted prior to the beginning of 
the experiment. The number of traders is defined as the average number of traders observed in the market over the 
Table 1—Pass-Through
Price
Price
(1)
(2)
Cost change
0.224
(0.0434)
Cost change–low
0.219
(0.0538)
Cost change–high
0.228
(0.0618)
Mean dependent variable
28.92
28.92
Observations
1,860
1,860
Market fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Week fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Notes: Price regressed on Cost change, the level of cost reduction per kg offered in market ​m​ 
on week ​w​. Cost change is the negative value of the marginal cost subsidy in cost shock treat-
ment markets and zero elsewhere, such that Cost change  =  {0 Ksh, −200 Ksh, −400 Ksh}) 
or {0 US$, −1.98 US$, −3.96 US$}. Week and market fixed effects are included to improve 
precision. The sample includes traders in market-days in which the market was in either the 
cost shock treatment or control period: market days assigned to the entry treatment are omit-
ted. Under this specification, the coefficient on the cost reduction term yields the pass-through 
rate, or ​∂ P/∂ c​. The first column shows the overall pass-through rate of 22 percent. The second 
column shows pass-through rates separately by “low” and “high” offers.


--- PAGE 17 ---
3721
BERGQUIST AND DINERSTEIN: COMPETITION AND ENTRY
VOL. 110 NO. 12
Estimates of ­pass-through rates are fairly tightly centered around the overall esti-
mate of 22 percent and no clear pattern is seen with the number of traders. To gain 
statistical power, the bottom two measures show the sample pooled into below- and 
­above-median number of traders; again, point estimates are not statistically signifi-
cantly different and are in fact remarkably close in magnitude. That ­pass-through 
does not vary with number of traders is consistent with, though not definitive evi-
dence of, collusion (see equation (5)).
We further explore in Figure 4 other dimensions of heterogeneity that could mat-
ter for how traders compete.27 First, we measure whether ­pass-through is different 
for markets on and off paved (tarmac) roads, which serves as a proxy for market geo-
graphic isolation. We find no evidence of heterogeneity by this measure. Next, we 
explore whether a higher intensity of explicit collusion predicts lower ­pass-through 
rates, measured by the number of ­market-days within a market in which traders have 
explicitly admitted to collusion.28 The point estimates suggest that ­pass-through is 
similar across these markets, and the differences are not statistically significant.
B. Demand Estimation
As described in Section II, in order to draw inference in our simplified model about 
the level of competition from the observed ­pass-through, one must first understand 
the curvature of demand. To do so, we use the demand experiment to estimate how 
course of the experiment. In order to remove any increases in the number of traders driven by the entry experiment, 
this figure uses the average of the predicted number of traders each week, based on market and week fixed effects.
27 These were not included in the design registry.
28 We construct, for each market, a count of the number of ­market-days in which at least one trader admitted 
to discussing (agreeing on) prices with other traders. We then divide the sample into markets above and below the 
median of this measure.
5
12
14
8
5
3
8
1
3
1
31
29
Markets
1 Trader
2 Traders
3 Traders
4 Traders
5 Traders
6 Traders
7 Traders
8 Traders
9 Traders
10 Traders
Below median (<4)
Above median (≥4)
−0.5
0
0.5
1
Individual
Pooled
Figure 3. ­Pass-Through by Market Size
Notes: ­Pass-through as estimated in markets of each size (bars represent the 95 percent confidence interval). The 
average for the full sample is 22 percent (dotted line). The bottom two estimates show pooled results, grouped into 
above/below median size.


--- PAGE 18 ---
3722
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
DECEMBER 2020
a household’s quantity of maize demanded varies with price. We plot the estimated 
treatment effects by randomized price change in Figure 5. Consumers were given the 
option to choose a new quantity to purchase at the new price. In the left graph, we plot 
the treatment effects on the fraction of consumers that changed quantities once offered 
the discount. This fraction is increasing in the size of the price change and reaches 
nearly 30 percent at the highest discount point. These changes translate into a strong 
relationship between price and quantity changes, as shown in the right graph.
Many common demand functional forms impose curvature and thus would 
divorce inference about how traders compete from the data. Instead, we will esti-
mate demand curvature. Ideally we would estimate demand ­nonparametrically, but 
because household demand is so heterogeneous and demand curvature depends on 
a function of the second derivative of demand, inference based on ­nonparametric 
demand estimation is highly imprecise. We thus impose a flexible class of demand 
functions that nests several commonly used functional forms, while leveraging the 
panel structure of the experiment to maximize statistical power in the presence of 
demand heterogeneity. We use the design feature that customers were approached 
after agreeing on an initial price and quantity combination, so that we observe 
customers making two choices with an exogenous price difference. Let ​t​ index 
the “experimental period,” i.e., whether the customer has yet to be approached 
(​t  =  0​) or already been offered a subsidy level (​t  =  1​). This allows us to capture 
the ­considerable household demand heterogeneity while still estimating demand 
Number traders
Tarmac
Discuss price
Agree price
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Below median/off tarmac
Above median/on tarmac
Figure 4. ­Pass-Through by Various Factors
Notes: ­Pass-through as estimated in markets in each category (bars represent the 95 percent confidence interval). 
The average for the full sample is 22 percent (dotted line). Categories are: above/below median number of traders; 
on/off tarmac roads; above/below median number of days in which at least one trader reports discussing prices 
with other traders; above/below the median number of days in which at least one trader reports a price agreement.


--- PAGE 19 ---
3723
BERGQUIST AND DINERSTEIN: COMPETITION AND ENTRY
VOL. 110 NO. 12
parameters precisely. We embed this household heterogeneity within a general 
­Bulow-Pfleiderer class of demand functions. Household ​i​’s demand ​​q​imt​​ is
(8)	
​​q​imt​(​P​imt​)​  =  ​
⎧
 
⎪
 
⎨ 
⎪ 
⎩
​​(​ a − ​P​imt​ 
_ 
​b​i​  ​)​ 
​ 1 
_ 
δ ​
​ ​η​imt​​  if ​P​imt​  ≤  a​ 
 
 
0
​ 
if ​P​imt​  >  a,
​
where ​a, ​b​i​, δ, ​η​imt​  >  0​.
The variable ​a​ is the choke price, such that households are indifferent between 
purchasing or not; ​​b​i​​ captures persistent (within the few minutes the experiment 
lasts) household heterogeneity while ​​η​imt​​ is a ­high-frequency demand shock. Here 
the price faced (​​P​imt​​) varies by customer, even within a market, because the exper-
iment varies the size of the discount. Given individual demand ​​q​imt​(​P​mt​)​​, market 
demand is ​​Q​mt​(​P​mt​)​  =  ​∑ i∈​​mw​​ 
  
​ ​q​imt​(​P​mt​)​​.
We choose this particular class of demand functions for its flexibility, tractability, 
and empirical foundation. First, this demand structure is flexible, nesting many of 
the functional forms common to the development and trade literature, including 
linear demand and quadratic demand.
Second, this class of demand functions is tractable, producing a constant elastic-
ity of the slope of inverse demand with respect to quantity (​E​) (Bulow and Pfleiderer 
1983).29 Recall that in the simple model described in Section II, the ­pass-through 
rate is determined by the profit weight ​ω​, potentially the number of traders, and 
the slope of inverse demand ​E​. While in theory ​E​ can vary with quantity, this is 
29 This property holds both for this specification of individual and market demand. Atkin and Donaldson (2015) 
also rely on this property in estimating markups.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Fraction changed quantity
−4.4
−3.9
−3.3
−2.8
−2.2
−1.7
−1.1
−0.6
−0.3
0
−4.4
−3.9
−3.3
−2.8
−2.2
−1.7
−1.1
−0.6
−0.3
0
Change in price (Ksh/kg)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Change in quantity (kgs)
Change in price (Ksh/kg)
Figure 5. Demand Experiment Quantity Effects
Notes: The panels show treatment effects on the fraction of consumers who choose a new quantity (left) and change 
in quantity transacted (right) by level of price change. Quantity changes are expressed in levels and are means that 
include consumers making no change. Price changes (Ksh/90kg bag) are determined by the randomized subsidy, 
which can take up to 10 values: ​​{0, − 25, − 50, − 100, − 150, − 200, − 250, − 300, − 350, − 400}​​ Ksh/90kg bag. The 
­x-axis on the plots are price changes per kg. The mean initial quantity and price are 65kg and 32 Ksh/kg, respec-
tively. The 95 percent confidence interval is shown around each point estimate.


--- PAGE 20 ---
3724
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
DECEMBER 2020
a second-order term for which it is already difficult to get precision on a single 
estimate using the full pooled data (as we will show below); attempting to further 
estimate ​E​ at different quantity levels would be even more challenging. Under the 
­Bulow-Pfleiderer class of demand functions, ​E​ is constant with respect to ​q​. To see 
this, note that the inverse market demand function is
(9)	
​​P​mt​  =  a − ​κ​mt​ ​Q​ mt​ 
δ ​​,
where constant ​​κ​mt​​ depends on the household heterogeneity (​​b​i​​) and time shocks 
(​​η​imt​​) in market ​m​. In this case, the elasticity of the slope of inverse demand, ​​E​mw​​, 
reduces to ​δ − 1​. Therefore, equation (4) simplifies to
(10)	
​​ρ​mw​  ≡  ​ ∂ ​P​mw​ 
_ 
∂ ​c​mw​ ​  =  ​{1 + ​  δ 
_ 
​N​mw​ ​ ​(1 + ω​(​N​mw​ − 1)​)​}​ 
−1
​​,
with our specific models of competition reducing to
(11)	
​​ρ​mw​  =  ​
⎧
 
⎪
 
⎨ 
⎪ 
⎩
​
​  ​N​mw​ 
_ 
​N​mw​ + δ ​
​ 
when Cournot competitive 
​ 
 
 
 
​  1 
_ 
1 + δ ​
​ 
when collusive.
 
​
Third, this class of demand functions has a strong empirical foundation. The 
experimental design includes variation intentionally designed to test this empirical 
fit. As shown by equation (10), because ​E​ is constant across ​q​, this class of demand 
functions predicts a constant ­pass-through rate for a given ​ω​, independent of the 
size of the cost shock (were ​E​ not constant in ​q​, cost shocks of different sizes, by 
driving different levels of optimal quantity sold, would induce differential changes 
in ​E​, which would in turn produce different ­pass-through rates). By offering two 
different levels of the cost shock, we are able to test for this prediction of constant 
­pass-through. Because markets are randomized into receiving the low versus high 
subsidy rate, the only difference in these two sets of markets, on average, should be 
the level of the cost shock. Under the ­Bulow-Pfleiderer class of demand functions, 
we should therefore expect to see identical ­pass-through rates for these two markets. 
This is exactly what we see in column 2 of Table 1, which suggests remarkably 
similar ­pass-through rates for the two levels of cost reduction. This lends empirical 
support to this choice of demand class.
Our focus on demand functions with ​E​ constant in ​q​ motivates our specification 
of consumer heterogeneity. We place heterogeneity in the ​​b​i​​ term while keeping ​a​ 
the same for all consumers.30 This preserves constant ​E​, matching the high versus 
low cost shock ­pass-through results and providing us with the benefits of tractabil-
ity when estimating a ­higher-order term, but comes at the expense of modeling an 
endogenous extensive margin.31 Given the potential importance of extensive margin 
30 We also impose constant ​δ​ across consumers. Because ​δ​ relates to a ­higher-order term in demand, we lack the 
variation to estimate heterogeneous ​δ​ with any precision.
31 Variation in ​a​, the choke price, would drive variation in which consumers enter the market at different prices. 
Constant ​a​ implies either full or no endogenous participation. The number of consumers may still vary for exoge-
nous reasons, but given our functional form, would not affect inference on the model of competition.


--- PAGE 21 ---
3725
BERGQUIST AND DINERSTEIN: COMPETITION AND ENTRY
VOL. 110 NO. 12
responses to price, in Section V we add heterogeneity in ​a​ and discuss the functional 
form we impose.32
Estimation, Identification, and Results.—To estimate the demand model, we 
implement a log transformation of equation (8) and take the first difference within 
customer:
(12)	
​log​(​q​im1​)​ − log​(​q​im0​)​  =  ​ 1 
_ 
δ ​(log​(a − ​P​im1​)​ − log​(a − ​P​im0​)​)​ 
	
+ ​(log​(​η​im1​)​ − log​(​η​im0​)​)​​,
where ​​P​im1​ − ​P​im0​​ is the subsidy amount.
Any endogeneity in prices due to persistent demand conditions is accounted for 
by the panel nature of this specification. We further use the randomized reduction in 
the price paid by consumers from the demand experiment as an instrument for the 
price term (​log​(a − ​P​im1​)​ − log​(a − ​P​im0​)​​) to address any remaining endogeneity 
(e.g., in ­high-frequency demand shocks, ​​η​imt​​) as we identify the model’s parameters.
We run the analysis with 936 observations. We estimate the vector of parame-
ters ​Θ  =  ​(a, δ)​ ′ ​​ in equation (12) using generalized methods of moments. We con-
struct our IV sample moments as the vector of 9 dummy variables for each positive 
discount level times the residual.33 We minimize the GMM objective function using 
the optimal weighting matrix from ­two-step estimation.
Results are presented at the top of Table 2, which show the point estimates and 
95 percent confidence intervals. Note that the confidence interval on ​δ​ is wide (for 
example, we cannot rule out very curved inverse demand of ​δ  =  6.43​). This is 
because ​δ​, which represents the elasticity of the slope of inverse demand (plus 1), is 
a higher order object which we are underpowered to measure with great precision, 
even with over 900 observations from the demand experiment. That said, we have 
enough precision to rule out some standard demand functional forms, including 
linear demand (​δ  =  1)​. Moreover, this degree of precision is sufficient for our pur-
poses. As we will see in the next subsection, from the point estimate on ​δ​, we can 
predict the level of ­pass-through that one should expect under various models of 
competition; we will find the prediction of one model to line up closely with what 
is observed empirically. Further, even at the bounds of our estimate of ​δ​, we can 
still reject that what we see empirically is consistent with other common models of 
competition.
32 Another approach to integrating an extensive margin would have been to model market choice and quantity 
demand jointly in a ­discrete-continuous demand system, where the discrete and continuous choices are linked via 
Roy’s Identity. While point estimates from this model lead to similar conclusions about the model of competition, 
the standard errors are large. Furthermore, given our data, summarizing the discrete choice of where to buy requires 
considerable dimension reduction, such as through a logit functional form assumption. This assumption puts strong 
restrictions on demand curvature that we seek to avoid.
33 We drop the consumers offered no discount as they have no ­within-consumer price variation and do not make 
a new quantity choice.


--- PAGE 22 ---
3726
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
DECEMBER 2020
C. Model of Competition
First, we demonstrate that the observed ­pass-through is very close to the col-
lusive model prediction evaluated at a demand curvature given by the parameter 
point estimates. Given the point estimate on ​δ​ of 4.1, we use equation (10) to esti-
mate the average ­pass-through rate one should expect to observe in the experi-
ment under various models of competition. If markets are Cournot competitive 
(​ω  =  0​), we should observe ­pass-through rates that vary with the number of traders: 
​ρ  =  N / ​(N + 4.1)​​.34 Given the distribution of number of traders in each market in 
our sample, the expected ­pass-through rate if markets are Cournot competitive is 
46 percent. On the other hand, if markets are collusive (​ω  =  1​), we should expect 
to observe 20 percent ­pass-through.35
Figure 6 displays the bootstrapped distribution of ​ρ​.36 We see that the mass of 
the distribution of ​ρ​ is concentrated near the predicted ­pass-through of 20 percent 
under collusion. The dotted lines, which identify the 95 percent confidence interval, 
clearly reject a ​ρ​ consistent with that predicted under a model of Cournot competi-
tion (and Bertrand competition).
This exercise does not take into account the fact that ​δ​ is estimated imprecisely. 
To account for this imprecision, we generate a bootstrapped distribution of ​ω​ by 
34 This would predict that ­pass-through would be increasing in the number of traders. Note that we already saw 
in Section IVA that ­pass-through did not vary with the number of traders in way that is consistent with this predicted 
pattern.
35 While not nested in our model, if traders are Bertrand competitors, we should observe 100 percent 
­pass-through, at least in this simple model.
36 The distribution was constructed using 1,000 block bootstrapped samples where blocks are defined by market 
× ­4-week-blocks (the level at which treatment was randomized). There are 180 such clusters from 60 markets.
Table 2—Model Estimates
Parameter 
estimate
95% confidence 
interval lower bound
95% confidence 
interval upper bound
Simple model
a
42.76
41.56
43.96
δ
4.07
1.71
6.43
ω
0.78
0.05
7.48
General model
​µ​a​
29.15
28.84
52.19
​σ​a​
2.87
2.48
60.00
δ
4.21
0.70
9.64
ω
1.07
0.20
3.09
γ
0.0006
−0.0006
0.0016
General model, ω = 1
γ
0.0007
−0.0010
0.0016
Notes: The point estimates and the 95 percent confidence intervals for the estimated parame-
ters of the simple and general models are displayed. The final row is the point estimate for the 
marginal cost slope under the general model where we impose ​ω  =  1​. This is the relevant cost 
parameter for markup and welfare analysis, which we implement given that traders maximize 
joint profits. The 95 percent confidence interval on ​γ​ in the model with ​ω  =  1​ imposed does 
not account for the testing step. For a specification that allows for joint estimation of ​γ​ and test-
ing of the model of competition, see online Appendix Section B.


--- PAGE 23 ---
3727
BERGQUIST AND DINERSTEIN: COMPETITION AND ENTRY
VOL. 110 NO. 12
estimating equation (10) with 1,000 bootstrapped estimates of ​ρ​ and ​δ​.37 The top 
graph in Figure 7 presents this distribution, overlaid with the benchmark values of ​ω​ 
under Cournot competition and collusion. We plot in red the value of ​ω​ predicted 
by the point estimates on ​ρ​ and ​δ​. The point estimate of ​ω​ is 0.78, with a 95 percent 
confidence interval of ​​(0.05, 7.48)​​, which is quite close to, and statistically indistin-
guishable from, the model benchmark of ​ω  =  1​ under perfect collusion. Moreover, 
while the collusive market benchmark of ​ω  =  1​ lies well within the 95 percent 
confidence interval, the levels of ​ω​ predicted by a Cournot model and perfectly 
competitive model lie outside these bounds. We are therefore able to reject them 
with 95 percent confidence.38
Under this simple model, the observed ­pass-through rate is therefore consistent 
with an underlying market structure in which traders act as if they maximize joint 
profits.
V.  Estimating the Form of Competition in the General Empirical Model
In Section II we started with a general model before imposing two ­supply-side 
assumptions: trader symmetry and constant marginal costs. We also made a 
37 We take the expectation of equation (10) over our markets with heterogeneous numbers of traders and esti-
mate ​ω​ to make equation (10) hold in expectation.
38 We are able to reject a Cournot competitive model because the confidence interval around ​δ​, however large, 
does exclude the extreme curvature necessary to justify such low ­pass-through under a Cournot model. To achieve 
a predicted ​ρ​ of 22 percent under a Cournot model, we would have required a ​δ​ of about 12.
Empirical
point
estimate
            Collusive
Cournot
Bertrand
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Pass-through rate
Figure 6. Predicted ­Pass-Through under Three Simple Models
Notes: Given our demand curvature estimate, we predict within our simple model that one would have observed 
100 percent ­pass-through in a Bertrand competitive market, 46 percent ­pass-through in a Cournot competitive mar-
ket, and 20 percent ­pass-through in a collusive market environment. The distribution of empirical ­pass-through, 
calculated for 1,000 bootstrapped samples, is shown in gray. The point estimate and 95 percent confidence interval 
are shown in red.


--- PAGE 24 ---
3728
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
DECEMBER 2020
­simplifying assumption in the demand model, placing heterogeneity across consum-
ers in ​​b​i​​, rather than in ​a​, which restricts adjustment on the extensive margin. The 
value of these simplifying assumptions is that they allow us to reduce each experi-
ment to identifying a single parameter; this ­one-to-one matching of experiment to 
theory makes transparent the link between experimental results and the identifica-
tion of the model of competition. Using this approach, Section IV estimated the 
profit weight and found evidence consistent with joint profit maximization.
To test whether our conclusions are robust to these simplifying assumptions, 
we now relax the ­supply-side assumptions and extend our demand model to 
Empirical
point
estimate
Empirical
point
estimate
Collusive
Collusive
Cournot
Cournot
 
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
ω
 
95% 
CI
95% 
CI
95% 
CI
95% 
CI
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
ω
Figure 7. Profit Weight (Omega) Estimates: Simple and General Models
Notes: The top panel shows the bootstrapped estimated ​ω​ distribution for the simple model while the bottom panel 
is for the general model. Bootstrap estimates of ​ω​ come from 1,000 bootstrapped estimates of ​ρ​ and ​δ​ plugged into 
equation (10) for the simple model and full demand and supply bootstrap for the general model. Recall that ​ω  =  0​ 
if Cournot competitive and ​ω  =  1​ if perfectly collusive. The point estimate and 95 percent confidence interval are 
shown in red.


--- PAGE 25 ---
3729
BERGQUIST AND DINERSTEIN: COMPETITION AND ENTRY
VOL. 110 NO. 12
­accommodate further household heterogeneity and an extensive margin. We view 
this more general model as complementary as it relaxes assumptions but with a less 
direct link between experimental results and inference on the model of competition, 
albeit still using experimental variation for identification of all parameters.
A. General Demand Model
We start with the general demand model as estimated demand will be an input 
into our supply model. We continue with the model in Section IVB but add further 
consumer heterogeneity by letting ​a​, the choke price, be ­consumer-specific:39
(13)	
​​q​imt​(​P​imt​)​  =  ​
⎧
 
⎪
 
⎨ 
⎪
 
⎩
​​(​ ​a​i​ − ​P​imt​ 
_ 
​b​i​ 
​)​ 
​ 1 
_ 
δ ​
​ ​η​imt​​  if ​P​imt​  ≤  ​a​i​​ 
 
 
0
​ 
if ​P​imt​  >  ​a​i​,
​
where ​​a​i​, ​b​i​, δ, ​η​imt​  >  0​.
This heterogeneity makes the model more flexible and introduces a heteroge-
neous household extensive margin. If the price is above a household’s ​​a​i​​, then 
the household will not purchase any maize at the market that week. This hetero-
geneity, though, proves challenging to identify even with the panel structure of 
the demand experiment. We thus impose a functional form on the heterogeneity, 
assuming ​​a​i​  ∼  N​(​μ​a​, ​σ​ a​ 
2​)​​. This heterogeneity permits more flexible market demand 
changes for a price change.40
Further, because the demand experiment reaches consumers only after they chose 
to visit the market and agree to a ­price-quantity bundle, we supplement our demand 
experiment results with additional data moments from the cost shock experiment to 
bring in more information about consumers’ choices related to the extensive mar-
gin.41 Before specifying the moments, we analyze the effects of the cost shock on 
­market-level transacted quantities. We estimate reduced-form regressions, using 
­market-week level versions of equations (6) and (7) but replacing the dependent 
variable of price with four quantity measures: number of transactions, transaction 
rate,42 kgs per transaction, and total kgs. We summarize the results in Table 3.
We find a large quantity response to the cost shock. For a decrease in marginal 
cost of 1 Ksh/kg, we estimate an increase of 846 kgs in a market/day (column 
5 of Table 3). The effect is driven almost entirely by the extensive margin, as we 
see an increase of 11 transactions (column 1). The effect on the intensive margin, 
which combines increased demand from a fixed set of consumers and compositional 
39 To the extent that some consumers may make multiple transactions, we allow ​a​ to vary by transaction.
40 While individual demand remains in the ­Bulow-Pfleiderer class of demand functions, market demand is no 
longer in the class and we will no longer rely on the sufficient statistics formula.
41 The variation in the demand experiment alone is technically sufficient to identify ​​μ​a​​ and ​​σ​a​​, the parameters of 
heterogeneity in ​a​, as ​​a​i​​ affects not just whether to buy anything but also how much; however, because the additional 
moments better target extensive margin choices, we present them as our main specification. Note, though, that we 
get very similar results when relying only on the demand experiment moments.
42 We observe the number of transactions for each ­market-day. We convert these to a transaction rate by dividing 
by the maximum daily number of transactions observed in sample for each market. Estimates of the profit weight 
in Section VB are robust to increasing the market size by at least a factor of 2.
