

--- PAGE 1 ---
American Economic Review 2020, 110(5): 1572–1602 
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20180805
1572
Building Nations through Shared Experiences: 
Evidence from African Football†
By Emilio ­Depetris-Chauvin, Ruben Durante, and Filipe Campante*
We examine whether shared collective experiences help build a 
national identity, by looking at the impact of national football teams’ 
victories in ­sub-Saharan Africa. We find that individuals surveyed 
in the days after an important victory of their country’s national 
team are 37 percent less likely to identify primarily with their eth-
nic group, and 30 percent more likely to trust other ethnicities, than 
those interviewed just before. Crucially, national team achievements 
also reduce violence: countries that (barely) qualified to the Africa 
Cup of Nations experience less civil conflict (9 percent fewer epi-
sodes) in the following months than countries that (barely) did not. 
(JEL D74, J15, L83, O15, O17, Z21)
What has made sport so uniquely effective a medium for inculcating 
national feelings […] is the ease with which even the least political or 
public individuals can identify with the nation as symbolized by young 
persons excelling […]. The imagined community of millions seems more 
real as a team of eleven named people. The individual, even the one who 
only cheers, becomes a symbol of his nation himself.
—Eric Hobsbawm, Nations and Nationalism since 1780
Few things stir national passions as much as sports, and from Hitler to Mandela, 
political leaders have frequently tried to harness that power to strengthen national 
identities (Hobsbawm 1990, Allison 2000, Carlin 2008, Hilton 2011). Yet, there is 
little empirical evidence as to how effective shared experiences such as those created 
by sporting achievements are, when it comes to ­nation-building.
This paper studies this question, focusing on the impact of association foot-
ball (henceforth, “football”) in ­sub-Saharan Africa, by investigating the impact of 
national football team performance in major international competitions. Football is 
* Depetris-Chauvin: Instituto de Economía, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile (email: edepetris@
uc.cl); Durante: ICREA, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona GSE, IPEG, and CEPR (email: ruben.durante@upf.
edu); Campante: Johns Hopkins University and NBER (email: fcampante@jhu.edu). Esther Duflo was the coeditor 
for this article. We thank three anonymous referees for many helpful suggestions, as well as Alberto Alesina, Sam 
Bazzi, Francesco Drago, Leopoldo Fergusson, Matthieu Couttounier, Quoc-Anh Do, Marcel Fafchamps, Ignacio 
Munyo, Jeff Staton, Wolfgang Stojetz, Jorge Tovar, Oliver Vanden Eynde, Joachim Voth, David Yanagizawa-Drott, 
Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, and especially Leonard Wantchekon for insightful comments. We also thank audiences at 
numerous seminars and conferences for comments. Christine Cai, Florin Cucu, Carlos Molina Guerra, Sebastian 
Melo, Francisco Eslava, José Miguel Pascual, and Catalina Morales provided excellent research assistance. Emilio 
Depetris-Chauvin acknowledges financial support from CONICYT, FONDECYT Iniciación 11160290.
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20180805 to visit the article page for additional materials and author  
disclosure statements.


--- PAGE 2 ---
1573
DEPETRIS-CHAUVIN ET AL.: BUILDING NATIONS
VOL. 110 NO. 5
perhaps the one sport most associated with nationalistic fervor around the world, 
and the sub-Saharan African context is one in which ­nation-building, and the tension 
between particular versus national identities, are especially salient (Miguel 2004).1
In this context, we find evidence confirming the intuition regarding the 
­nation-building power of sports: national football team success weakens ethnic 
identification, as opposed to national identity, improves attitudes toward other eth-
nicities, and reduces actual ­interethnic violence.
For our first set of findings, we match data from five waves of the Afrobarometer 
survey with information on 69 official matches involving African teams between 
2002 and 2015, covering over 37,000 respondents in 25 countries. We exploit plau-
sibly exogenous differences in the timing of the interviews relative to the timing of 
the matches, by comparing ­self-reported attitudes between individuals interviewed 
in the days immediately before a match of their national team and individuals with 
the same ethnic background and in the same country, but interviewed in the days 
immediately after that same match.
We find that individuals interviewed after a national team match are less likely to 
report a strong sense of ethnic identity than those interviewed just before the match. 
This is entirely driven by national team victories, whereas defeats have no discern-
ible impact on that ­self-identification, suggesting that the experience of success is 
what galvanizes supporters and tilts the balance between ethnic and national identity 
in favor of the latter.2 The effect of victories is over 5 percentage points, which is 
sizable, as it corresponds to a 37 percent decrease in the average probability of eth-
nic ­self-identification, and quite persistent within the limited time window for which 
data are available (i.e., up to 30 days before and after the match), becoming even 
larger several days after the match.
­Post-victory respondents are also significantly more likely to trust and interact 
with members of other ethnicities, an increase which is not matched, quantitatively, 
by increased dislike of foreigners. Crucially, respondents’ lower emphasis on ethnic 
identity and higher trust in others do not merely reflect a generally positive mood 
due to ­post-victory euphoria. In fact, we find no effect of national teams’ victories 
on trust in the ruling party or approval for the incumbent, a result which suggests 
that politicians’ effort to use national teams’ achievements to boost their own pop-
ularity may not pay off, nor on respondents’ optimism about their own or the coun-
try’s economic prospects.
1 We use the term “football,” as opposed to “soccer,” in deference to how the sport is commonly known in 
Africa. Interest in football in Africa is exceptionally high by international standards: the survey data from the World 
Football report (Repucom 2014) (available from Nielsen Sports) indicate that 75 percent of respondents in Africa 
report being interested in football, against a 46 percent global average. Sports in general, and football in particular, 
has traditionally played a key role in ­nation-building in Africa (Darby 2002), as illustrated by examples such as 
the historic qualification of the Ivory Coast to the 2006 FIFA World Cup, or the unexpected success of the South 
African national rugby team in the 1995 Rugby World Cup (Carlin 2008). Outside of Africa, other cases of sports 
victories that spurred great patriotic fervor and primed national unity over racial and regional cleavages include the 
surprising victory of the US ice hockey team against the USSR in the 1980 Winter Olympics (the ­so-called “Miracle 
on Ice”), and the success of France and Spain in the 1998 and the 2010 editions of the FIFA World Cup, respectively.
2 This seems consistent with the social psychology literature on success/failure attributional bias, whereby 
people tend to internalize success and externalize failure (Miller and Ross 1975, Wann and Dolan 1994). Relatedly, 
Heere et al. (2013) interviews South African individuals before and after the realization of the 2010 FIFA World 
Cup in that country, and finds no evidence of a change in national versus ethnic identification, though the same 
authors (Heere et al. 2016) find that there is a decrease in the impact of ethnic identity on social cohesion.


--- PAGE 3 ---
1574
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
For our second key set of findings, we combine the football data with data on 
the occurrence and severity of political violence events, available from the Armed 
Conflict Location and Event Data Project (ACLED) for the period ­1997–2015. Our 
approach exploits the ­quasi-randomness of qualification to the final tournament of 
the Africa Cup of Nations (ACN) for teams that, prior to the last round of group 
stage matches, could still qualify: for each two teams in the same group that, going 
into the very last round of matches, could still qualify, we attribute the one that 
actually qualified to the treatment group, and the one that barely failed to do so to 
the control group.
We find that countries whose teams (barely) qualified to the ACN tournament 
experience significantly less ethnic conflict in the following six months than coun-
tries whose teams (barely) did not. This effect is sizable, significant, and appears to 
be quite persistent, lasting up to several months after the event.
A number of additional results shed light on the mechanism behind these key 
effects. First, there is a central role for the experience of national team success: the 
impact on ethnic identification is driven only by victories in ­high-stakes official 
games (i.e., Africa Cup of Nations and FIFA World Cup qualifiers and finals), as 
opposed to friendly matches; the effect is substantially larger for victories against 
traditional rivals, which are likely to trigger a stronger emotional reaction; and it is 
similar for wins in home and in away games, indicating that it is not driven by direct 
participation in the event.
Second, there is evidence suggesting a “role model” mechanism, whereby vic-
tories showcase how ­interethnic cooperation can lead to achievement against a for-
eign opposing group: the effect of victories is stronger the more diverse the ethnic 
composition of the national team. In addition, there seems to be some degree of 
substitutability between the shared experiences created by national team success 
and other, more expensive forms of ­nation-building: the effect is weaker where the 
state is more present, specifically in ways that might lead to a stronger connection to 
the nation (roads, post office, schools).
We also find that the effect of national sporting achievement in reducing violence 
is greater when that achievement is unexpected: it is stronger for teams that had 
never qualified to the ACN tournament before, or that had not qualified in a long 
time.3 In addition, the reduction occurs in areas with politically weak ethnic groups, 
and with relatively large ethnic diversity, which is where one would expect the issue 
of national identity to be particularly fraught.
Taken together, our findings indicate that shared collective experiences, such as 
important sporting achievements, can be effective at priming sentiments of national 
unity and at attenuating even ­deeply-rooted ethnic mistrust. Moreover, we find that 
they have tangible effects on the prevalence of conflict. Even if they are transient, 
our results suggest that they may last long enough to open a precious window of 
3 Our finding that unexpected results are more consequential than expected ones is in line with previous evi-
dence on the effect of sports events on various outcomes. For example, in a study on the impact of National Football 
League (NFL) games on ­intra-household violence, Card and Dahl (2011) finds that upset losses are associated with 
a 10 percent increase in violence toward female partners while expected ones have no impact. Similarly, Munyo and 
Rossi (2013) finds that upset losses increase violent property crime whereas unexpected victories strongly reduce it, 
though both effects are extremely ­short-lived and mainly due to incapacitation.


--- PAGE 4 ---
1575
DEPETRIS-CHAUVIN ET AL.: BUILDING NATIONS
VOL. 110 NO. 5
opportunity for political dialogue, negotiations, and reforms capable of producing 
­long-lasting improvements.
Our results shed new light on the mechanisms available for fostering 
­nation-building. This is evidently an important question, as many countries fea-
ture strong ethnic, linguistic, or regional cleavages, which can lead to tensions 
and even outright violence, with detrimental consequences for economic develop-
ment (Easterly and Levine 1997; Alesina, Baqir, and Easterly 1999; Alesina and 
La Ferrara 2005; Miguel and Gugerty 2005). Overcoming such cleavages has long 
been a crucial challenge in the consolidation of modern states, from nineteenth cen-
tury Europe to ­present-day developing countries and even developed ones (e.g., 
Spain, Belgium). This has led many countries to adopt policies aimed at forging a 
common identity, making citizens see themselves as part of the nation as a whole 
rather than of their specific group, and “feeling a sufficient amount of commonality 
of interests, goals and preferences [that] they do not wish to separate from each 
other” (Alesina and Reich 2015, p. 3; Alesina, Reich, and Riboni 2017).
However, such policies often include the provision of public services: from mass 
schooling to military conscription, from infrastructure building to resettlement pro-
grams (Tilly 1975, Weber 1976, Finer 1975, Ramirez and Boli 1987, Bandiera et al. 
2019, Conversi 2008, Bel 2011, Bazzi et al. 2019). This requires a substantial level 
of state capacity, and, as such, poses a clear conundrum: if internal fractionalization 
is an obstacle to the consolidation of a capable state, it can itself become a major 
hurdle for the adoption of policies that could overcome it. On the other end of the 
spectrum are other “softer” and less tangible ­nation-building tools involving the use 
of symbols, such as the national flag or the national anthem, meant to evoke and 
reinforce national identity. Yet, while such “banal nationalism” (Billig 1995) may 
help maintain a national identity that has already been established, it is unlikely to 
be strong enough to make one emerge.
Our results point at a middle ground between these two extremes: the experiences 
perceived by the citizens of a country as being collectively shared between them. 
Indeed, as pointed out by Anderson (1983) in his seminal work on nationalism, 
nations are fundamentally “imagined communities,” and highly symbolic and emo-
tionally charged experiences, such as those created by sporting achievements, can 
help make the image of the national communion live in each citizen’s mind.
Our research contributes to various other streams of literature. First, it relates to 
previous work on the determinants of ethnic identification which indicates that the 
strength of ethnic identification may be malleable by factors such as electoral com-
petition, economic modernization, or whether an ethnic group holds power (Eifert, 
Miguel, and Posner 2010; Robinson 2014; Green forthcoming).4 Yet, due to data 
limitations and identification issues, it has been difficult for these contributions to go 
beyond correlations and draw causal conclusions. Our paper fills this gap by provid-
ing robust causal evidence that the patriotic sentiments primed by important sport-
ing achievements can affect the strength of ethnic versus national identity. In doing 
so, we add to the ­micro-level experimental evidence that sports affiliation can reduce 
4 Berge et al. (2015) finds evidence that priming national identity is not very effective in affecting interethnic 
cooperation, in the context of an experiment in Kenya, though they also find little evidence of ethnic bias in that 
context in the first place.


--- PAGE 5 ---
1576
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
ethnic identification (Kurzban, Tooby, and Cosmides 2001) and favor ­cross-group 
integration (Lowe 2018). We also add to the literature that has shown how shared 
collective experiences can affect individual attitudes in politically relevant ways 
(Clingingsmith, Khwaja, and Kremer 2009; Madestam and ­Yanagizawa-Drott 2011; 
Kaplan and Mukand 2014), which itself builds on a long literature in social psychol-
ogy, going back to Durkheim, that has addressed the emotional impact of collec-
tive experiences. As aptly summarized by Páez et al. (2015, p. 172), “doing things 
together [has] been demonstrated to enhance ­self-categorization as a member of a 
group, sense of union with others, positive affect, and prosocial behavior. … When 
expressed collectively, human feelings intensify.”
Our paper also relates to previous work on the determinants of interpersonal trust 
which has documented how historical episodes had ­long-lasting effect on contem-
porary trust attitudes (Nunn and Wantchekon 2011, Buggle 2016, Jacob and Tyrell 
2010). Our findings indicate that other, more transitory factors, can also have a sub-
stantial impact on trust attitudes, particularly toward people of other ethnicities. In 
this respect, our results are especially related to recent work by Robinson (2016), 
which shows that manipulating the salience of national identity in a “­lab-in-the-field” 
experiment improves ­interethnic trust, and by Miguel (2004), which argues that 
­nation-building policies can improve ­interethnic cooperation.
Our work contributes to the vast literature on the determinants of civil conflict, 
by documenting that sporting achievements associated with national identity can 
contribute to reducing violence. On a related note, Bertoli (2017) finds an impact of 
international football on increasing the likelihood of interstate conflict. This is con-
sistent with our findings, in that a stronger national identity may come in opposition 
to outsiders. We find some evidence of increased animosity toward foreigners in the 
Afrobarometer data, though not conclusively due to low precision.
The paper is organized as follows. Section  I introduces the data. Sections  II 
and III present and discuss the empirical strategy and results for the individual- and 
­country-level analysis, respectively. Section IV concludes.
I.  Data
A. National Football Teams’ Matches
We collect information on all official matches played by men’s national teams of 
various ­sub-Saharan African countries over the period ­1990–2015; these data are 
available from the FIFA statistical office (FIFA Statistical Office 2018). (We disre-
gard countries from the Maghreb region because, for these countries, Afrobarometer 
surveys did not include questions on ethnic identity.) In particular, we focus on 
matches played for both the qualifying and the tournament phases of the two most 
important competitions for African national football teams: the Africa Cup of 
Nations (ACN) and the FIFA World Cup (WC). For each match we have informa-
tion on the date, the location, the opponent, the competition, the phase, and the final 
score. We use the information on the date of the match to combine the data with both 
the individual survey data and the conflict data described below.
Overall, for the ­individual-level analysis, we use information from 69 official 
matches played between 2002 and 2015, for which Afrobarometer surveys were 


--- PAGE 6 ---
1577
DEPETRIS-CHAUVIN ET AL.: BUILDING NATIONS
VOL. 110 NO. 5
administered within a window of 15 days before or after each match. Out of our 
sample of matches, 31 were wins by the respondent’s national team, 29 were losses, 
and 9 were draws, with 22 ­country-years (out of 57) experiencing at least 1 victory. 
We also consider a ­30-day window, for robustness, which increases the number of 
official matches to 85, and collect information on 66 friendly matches over the same 
period, for a placebo check.
For the ­country-level conflict analysis, we also collect information on teams’ 
standings in ten ACN qualifying rounds held between 1997 and 2015. In particular, 
we record all teams’ standings before and after the final match of the qualifying 
stage to identify teams that, prior to the last game, could still qualify to the tourna-
ment phase, and, among these, those that eventually did. The full list of countries 
and years exploited in the analysis is shown in online Appendix Table A.1.
B. Survey Data on Individual Attitudes
We use individual survey data from the Afrobarometer, a series of nationally 
representative surveys covering several African countries (Afrobarometer 2016). 
Specifically, we use five waves (rounds 2 through 6) of the survey, conducted 
between 2002 and 2015. Interviews are conducted in the local languages, and ques-
tions are standardized so that responses can be compared across countries. Questions 
are designed to assess respondents’ attitudes on a range of issues, including attitudes 
toward democracy, political actors, markets, and civil society.
For our analysis, we focus on the questions regarding individuals’ identification 
with the nation and with their own ethnic group, and trust in others, particularly in 
people from other ethnicities. (We exclude round 1 of the Afrobarometer because it 
did not ask questions comparing ethnic and national identity.) In addition, we also 
use information on a range of respondents’ personal characteristics, with particular 
regard to the main language spoken at home which, following Eifert, Miguel, and 
Posner (2010), we use as a proxy for ethnic background.5 Overall, we use data from 
57 survey rounds conducted in 25 sub-Saharan African countries.
Our main outcome variable is a measure of ethnic identification, which captures 
the strength of an individual’s ethnic identity relative to national identity. The vari-
able is based on responses to the following question: “Let us suppose that you had to 
choose between being a [National ] and being a [respondent’s ethnic group]. Which 
of these two groups do you feel most strongly attached to? ” Respondents could 
pick any of the following five options: 0 (“only [National]”), 1 (“more [National] 
than [Ethnic group]), 2 (“equally [National] and [Ethnic group]),” 3 (“more [Ethnic 
group] than [National]”), and 4 (“only [Ethnic group]”). We construct a binary mea-
sure of ethnic identity that takes a value of 1 for all respondents who report feeling 
“only ethnic” or “more ethnic than national.” 6
5 Language is the best proxy for ethnic background available in all the waves of the Afrobarometer we use in our 
analysis. In fact, the Afrobarometer questionnaires did not include explicit questions about the respondent’s ethnic-
ity for its first two rounds. We exclude from our main analysis individuals with unknown language spoken at home. 
We also exclude those reporting an ­Indo-European or Arabic language. In online Appendix Table A.2 we show that, 
for the waves for which data on ethnicity are available, our results are analogous if we include ethnic group fixed 
effects instead of language group fixed effects.
6 We use the binary variable because, in Round 2, the information is obtained in binary fashion. More precisely, 
the respondent first chooses between “national” and “group” identity, and in the latter case may then choose to 


--- PAGE 7 ---
1578
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
In Figure 1, we plot the share of respondents that reported stronger ethnic than 
national identity, for a selected group of countries over our sample. (The full list is 
shown in online Appendix Figure A.1.) We can see that the relative strength of eth-
nic identity varies considerably across countries, and even in the same country over 
time, possibly also due to the impact of the type of major sports events we inves-
tigate. One suggestive example in this regard is given by Mali, where more than 
30 percent of the individuals interviewed in 2002 emphasized ethnic over national 
identity, but where less than 15 percent did so in 2013, when the Malian national 
football team achieved third place in the Africa Cup of Nations, its best performance 
in the history of the competition. Similarly, the share of Zambians who report a 
strong sense of ethnic identification was greatly reduced in 2013, a year after the 
country’s historic and unexpected victory in the 2012 ACN. In contrast, the strength 
of ethnic identity appears to be lower and more stable in a place like Tanzania, 
which is known for its effective ­nation-building policies (Miguel 2004).
To explore the impact of national team’s victories on key respondents’ attitudes, 
we use a number of additional variables. First, we use the standard measure of trust 
(“trust in fellow countrymen”), defined on a ­4-point scale from 0 (“not at all”) to 3 
(“a lot”) (This measure is only available in Round 4.) Second, using questions on 
respondents’ trust in people from other ethnic groups (available only in Round 3), 
we construct a measure of ­interethnic trust, also defined over the same ­4-point scale. 
Third, we use two questions from Round 6, asking whether respondents would like 
having people from a certain group as neighbors, focusing on “People from other 
ethnic groups” and “Immigrants or foreign workers” (answers from 1 “strongly dis-
like” to 5 “strongly like”), reversing the original order so that 5 means “strongly 
dislike.” Fourth, to assess the effect of national team’s victories on support for the 
government, we code two additional variables: trust in the ruling party (with answers 
declare his/her group identity as “Language/tribe/ethnic group.” (Other options in the second question included 
gender or political party, for instance.) In that case, we code the binary variable as equal to 1 for all respondents who 
chose a group identity of the “Language/tribe/ethnic group” type.
Figure 1.  Ethnic Identification over Time and across Selected Countries
0.25
0.05
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.15
Fraction of respondents identifed
as ethnic over national
2002−2003
2005−2006
2008−2009
2011−2013
2014−2015
Mali
Tanzania
Zambia


--- PAGE 8 ---
1579
DEPETRIS-CHAUVIN ET AL.: BUILDING NATIONS
VOL. 110 NO. 5
ranging from 0 “not at all” to 3 “a lot”) and approval of the president (with answers 
ranging from 1 “strongly disapprove” to 4 “strongly approve”). Finally, to examine 
whether victories influence respondents’ overall mood, we code two measures of 
respondents’ assessment of their current living conditions and of the country’s eco-
nomic situation, as well two measures of how they expect these conditions to evolve 
in the future.
In all cases, we code dummy variables for our main analysis: depending on 
the variables, the dummy takes a value of 1 for “somewhat” / “a lot,” “somewhat 
like” / “strongly like,” “somewhat approve” / “strongly approve,” “same” / “fairly 
good” / “very good,” “same” / “better” / “much better.”
C. ­Country-Level Conflict Data
To study the impact of national teams’ victories on actual violence, in the last 
part of our analysis we use ­country-level data on conflict from the Armed Conflict 
Location and Event Data Project (ACLED). The data, available for the period 
­1997–2015, include information on the date and location of any episode of politi-
cal violence (i.e., battles, killings, riots) that involve either the government, rebel 
groups, militias, or civilians (Raleigh et al. 2010). The data also include informa-
tion on the severity of the events, measured by the number of associated fatalities. 
Based on this information we construct three measures of conflict intensity at the 
­country-week level: (i) the number of conflict events occurred, (ii) a dummy for 
whether any conflict event occurred, and (iii) the number of casualties associated 
with these events.
We also construct analogous measures specifically for ­ethnically related conflict. 
Though the ACLED data do not explicitly distinguish between ethnic and ­non-ethnic 
conflict, some of the information in the ACLED records can be used to indirectly 
make this distinction. Specifically, we code as ­ethnically relevant conflict events that 
involve the participation of actors classified as ethnic militia or whose denomination 
refers to an ethnic faction (e.g., “Bete Ethnic Group”), or any event for which the 
ACLED records include a specific reference to ethnic tensions as cause of violence. 
Such procedure is of course vulnerable to substantial measurement error, namely to 
the risk of coding as ­non-ethnic episodes that are in fact driven by ethnic motives. 
Yet, to the extent that it affects the dependent variable and is unrelated to the timing 
of qualification, measurement error should only reduce the precision of our esti-
mates. According to our classification, about 7.2 percent of ­country-week observa-
tions in our sample have at least one ­ethnically related conflict event.
To shed further light on the potential mechanisms, we exploit the information on 
the spatial location of different conflict episodes. We first link the location of conflict 
events to the location of ethnic groups surveyed in the Ethnic Power Relations (EPR) 
dataset (Cederman, Wimmer, and Min 2010). The EPR (and its ­geo-coded version, 
the GeoEPR 2018 dataset (Wucherpfennig et al. 2011)) provides ­ethnic-specific 
information on political representation (or exclusion) in the national government 
across space and time, and it classifies ethnic groups as politically relevant if “at 
least one political organization claims to represent it in national politics or if its 
members are subjected to ­state-led political discrimination” (Cederman, Wimmer, 
and Min 2010, p. 99). We distinguish conflict events occurring in areas inhabited by 


--- PAGE 9 ---
1580
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
­politically strong groups (“monopoly” or “dominant” groups, according to EPR) 
from those in places inhabited by politically weak ones (“discriminated,” “power-
less,” or “­self-excluded”). About 6 percent and 21 percent of ­country-week observa-
tions in our sample have at least one conflict event in areas of politically strong and 
politically weak ethnic groups, respectively.
Finally, we classified conflict events as occurring in areas with high and low 
­ethnolinguistic diversity. To do so, we use the Ethnologue dataset (Lewis 2009) 
to compute the number of languages spoken in each (­first-level) administrative 
­subnational unit. We classified as low linguistic diversity (high linguistic diversity) 
location the ­subnational units wherein only one language is (more than 5 different 
languages are) spoken. About 20 percent (50 percent) of the almost 600 ­first-level 
­subnational administrative units in ­sub-Saharan Africa host only one language 
(more than 5 languages). According to our classification, about 9 percent (35 per-
cent) of ­country-week observations in our sample have at least one ­low-diversity 
(­high-diversity) conflict event. Summary statistics for the different measures of con-
flict used in our analysis are reported in online Appendix Tables A.3 and A.4.
II.  ­Individual-Level Analysis: Ethnic Identification and Trust
A. Empirical Strategy
Our empirical strategy to estimate the impact of national team performance on 
individual attitudes is summarized by the following equation:
(1)	
​Outcom​e​i,e,c,m,d,t​  =  α + β Pos​t​i,e,c,m,d,t​
	
+ γ′ ​X​i​ + ​θ​c,m​ + ​δ​e,t​ + λ′ ​Λ​d​ + ​ε​i,e,c,m,d,t​​ ,
where ​i​, ​e​, ​c​, ​m​, ​d​, and ​t​ denote respectively individual, language group (a proxy 
for ethnicity), country, match, date of the interview, and year. ​Outcome​ is one of 
the attitudinal variables described in the previous section. Post is the main regressor 
of interest, and takes value 1 if the respondent was interviewed in the days after an 
official match (or victory) of her national team, and 0 otherwise. The variable ​​X​i​​ is 
a vector of baseline individual controls (i.e., education, gender, age, age squared, 
unemployment status, and an indicator for living in a rural area); ​θ​ and ​δ​ are coun-
try × match and language group × year fixed effects, respectively; ​​Λ​d​​ is a vector 
of dummies for day of the week, day of the month, and month of the year to which 
the interview date belongs, to account for possible ­within-year, -month, or -week 
patterns in survey responses; ​ε​ is an error term.
The presence of ­country-match fixed effects means that, when estimating equa-
tion (1), we identify the effect of Post by comparing respondents interviewed after 
a given match (or victory) of their national team with all other respondents of the 
same country and language group before that very same match. As for standard 
errors, we will show results under different clustering approaches, but in our bench-
mark specifications we cluster by country × year, to be relatively conservative. Also, 
since we run our econometric model on multiple outcomes and we test ­multiple 


--- PAGE 10 ---
1581
DEPETRIS-CHAUVIN ET AL.: BUILDING NATIONS
VOL. 110 NO. 5
­heterogeneous effects, we report False Discovery Rate (FDR) adjusted ­p-values fol-
lowing Anderson (2008).
We mainly focus on the sample of individuals interviewed in the 15 days before 
and after official matches of their national football team. We consider, in particular, 
the sample of respondents exposed to only one match, which includes over 37,000 
individuals between treatment and control groups.7 Descriptive statistics are pre-
sented in online Appendix Table A.5. In particular, 47 percent of the individuals 
were exposed to a match in the 15 days prior to the interview; of these roughly 
42 percent experienced a victory, while 41 percent and 16 percent saw their national 
team losing and drawing, respectively.
Our identification strategy relies on the ­quasi-random nature of the date and final 
result of matches relative to the timing of the Afrobarometer interviews. Hence, our 
identifying assumption is that national teams’ matches did not interfere with the 
implementation of the survey, nor did victories interfere differently compared to 
­nonvictories. Such possibilities seem especially unlikely since, as emphasized by 
Eifert, Miguel, and Posner (2010), the logistics involved in the implementation of 
the Afrobarometer survey (selection of the enumeration sites, setting up of the field 
teams, etc.) requires many months if not years of preparation, and are hardly related 
to the occurrence of sports events let alone to their unpredictable result.
To assess the validity of our strategy, we conduct a balance test for several respon-
dent characteristics that may potentially correlate with the timing of the interview 
and the outcomes of interest. These include: gender, education, age, unemployment 
status, religious membership, whether the respondent belongs to the country’s ethnic 
majority, whether (s)he lives in a rural area, and whether (s)he lives in an area where 
basic public goods are available.8 To control for the possibility of social desirability 
bias, we also test that several characteristics of the interviewer are not systematically 
different between treatment and control groups. These include: gender, education, 
whether the interviewer speaks the same language as the respondent, and whether 
the interviewer thought anyone influenced the respondent during the interview.9 We 
perform two separate balance tests: one comparing individuals interviewed before 
and after a match, regardless of its outcome, and another comparing individuals 
interviewed before and after a victory. To ensure that we compare respondents from 
the same country interviewed around the same match, we regress each variable on 
7 We chose a rather tight time window to avoid having the same individual be in the treatment group for one 
game and in the control group for another one. We later show that our results remain virtually unchanged when rep-
licating the analysis using a larger time window (i.e., 30 days). (Online Appendix Figure A.2 shows the distribution 
of interviews in the proximity of the relevant matches.) By the same token, focusing on individuals treated by just 
one game makes the analysis and the interpretation of the results easier, since it does not require aggregating the 
potentially contrasting results of subsequent games (e.g., one win followed by one loss). For robustness, we also 
show that the results are similar when using the larger sample of respondents potentially exposed to one or more 
matches, which includes more than 45,000 individuals (online Appendix Table A.6). In this case the treatment 
variable is the share of matches won, or the share of available points won. One limitation of looking at the impact of 
multiple games is that this approach does not allow for the inclusion of ­country-match ­fixed effects.
8 Evidence suggests that these characteristics can potentially affect ethnic sentiments. For instance, Robinson 
(2016) shows that urban status, education, gender, and formal employment all positively predict national identifi-
cation (relative to ethnic). Regarding age, instead, Eifert, Miguel, and Posner (2010) finds no evidence that young 
people are more likely to ­self-identify in ethnic terms.
9 A large literature argues that interviewers’ observable traits such as race, ethnicity, and gender can influence 
respondents’ answers (see West and Blom 2017 for a summary). In particular, using Afrobarometer data, Adida 
et al. (2015) finds that respondents give systematically different answers to coethnic and ­non-coethnic interviewers.


--- PAGE 11 ---
1582
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
either treatment including ­country-match fixed effects, and cluster standard errors 
at the same level.
The results are reported in Table 1. Individual characteristics are largely balanced 
between respondents interviewed before and after the same match (panel A), as 
well as when comparing individuals interviewed before and after a victory of the 
national team (panel B). The only exceptions (all in panel B) are education, gender, 
and rural status. Regarding the first two variables, the differences between treat-
ment and control group are very small: on average individuals interviewed after a 
victory were only 0.9 percent more likely to be men than women ( ­p-value: 0.072), 
and displayed lower educational attainment ( ­p-value: 0.039) by just 15 percent of 
a standard deviation (or 10 percent of its mean value). Regarding rural status, the 
comparison indicates that individuals in rural areas are somewhat more likely to be 
interviewed after a victory ( ­p-value: 0.023). Since men, people in rural areas, and 
less educated people are generally more likely to identify themselves with their eth-
nicity (in our data, as per online Appendix Table A.7, and consistent with Robinson 
2014), gender is the only imbalance that would work in the direction of finding a 
negative effect of wins on ethnic identification. In any event, in all regressions pre-
sented below we control for the entire set of respondents’ individual characteristics, 
though their inclusion does not affect our results.
B. Results: National Team’s Victories and Ethnic Identification
In Table 2, we test the empirical relationship between national team perfor-
mance and ethnic identification on the baseline sample of all respondents within 
15 days of just one match. We start off by regressing the dummy for stronger eth-
nic than national identity on a dummy for being interviewed after a match, con-
trolling for ­country-match and language group × year dummies. The inclusion of 
Table 1—Balance in Covariates
Panel A. ­Post-game
Panel B. Post-victory
 
Covariate
 
Observations
 
Mean
 
Estimate
Standard 
errors
 
Estimate
Standard 
errors
Male
37,134
0.50
0.006
0.004
0.009
0.005
Education
37,134
3.08
−0.136
0.150
−0.317
0.155
Age
37,134
36.9
0.804
0.702
1.534
0.800
Unemployed
37,134
0.30
0.000
0.013
−0.003
0.013
Major ethnicity
37,134
0.46
−0.016
0.046
−0.016
0.039
Rural
37,134
0.61
0.098
0.074
0.173
0.076
Religious group member
37,005
0.42
−0.026
0.016
−0.017
0.024
Public goods
37,134
0.48
−0.001
0.020
−0.030
0.017
Same language
37,134
0.47
−0.038
0.032
−0.018
0.042
Influenced by others
37,087
0.05
−0.004
0.006
−0.002
0.008
Male interviewer
37,134
0.56
−0.002
0.011
−0.004
0.017
Education interviewer
36,480
7.11
−0.022
0.046
−0.064
0.057
Age interviewer
37,134
28.6
0.012
0.114
0.147
0.134
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at ­country-match level. Each panel presents point estimates 
and standard errors for 13 regressions of a covariate (listed at the left) on ­Post-game (panel A) and ­Post-victory 
(panel B). ­Post-game takes value 1 if the respondent was interviewed within 15 days after a game (regardless of 
the result), 0 otherwise. Post-victory takes value 1 if the respondent was interviewed within 15 days after a victory, 
0 otherwise. All estimates are based on OLS regressions using 69 ­country-match dummies to ensure that the com-
parison in the covariates is made between respondents in the proximity of the same game and in the same country.


--- PAGE 12 ---
1583
DEPETRIS-CHAUVIN ET AL.: BUILDING NATIONS
VOL. 110 NO. 5
­country-match fixed effects, in particular, allows us to control for all ­country-level 
confounds that vary from one match to another, such as political or economic events 
(e.g., national elections, ethnic conflicts, ­nationwide economic policies, yearly vari-
ation in commodity prices, etc.).
The result, in column 1, indicates that national team matches have a significant 
negative effect on the probability of ­self-identifying with one’s own ethnicity as 
opposed to the country as a whole. The coefficient becomes slightly larger and more 
significant in columns 2 and 3, where we include the baseline set of individual con-
trols, as well as seasonal fixed effects to deal with the possibility that attitudes may 
vary over the year.
The collective experience of a national team match therefore affects the likeli-
hood of ethnic identification. What column 4 shows, however, is that it is actually 
the experience of victory that really weakens ethnic identity. In fact, as can be seen in 
column 5, drawing or losing a match has no distinct effect. The absence of an effect 
in the case of defeats is especially interesting, as it suggests that negative collective 
experiences do not necessarily undermine national unity.10 Finally, in ­column 7 we 
10 The idea that people tend to internalize success and externalize failure is present in the social psychology lit-
erature on success/failure attributional bias (Miller and Ross 1975). The presence of this type of bias among sports 
Table 2—National Team’s Performance and Ethnic Identification
Ethnic over national identity (­0–1 dummy)
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
Probit
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
­Post-game
−0.026
−0.029
−0.036
−0.001
(0.012)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.016)
­Post-victory
−0.052
−0.053
−0.053
−0.243
(0.019)
(0.017)
(0.016)
(0.062)
[0.010]
[0.010]
[0.010]
­Post-draw
−0.026
(0.039)
­Post-defeat
−0.000
(0.017)
­Post-victory marginal effect
−0.048
(0.012)
Country × match FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Language × year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Individual controls
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Seasonal FE
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
37,060
37,060
37,060
37,060
37,060
37,060
35,305
R2
0.094
0.102
0.104
0.104
0.104
0.104
—
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by country × year in parentheses. False discovery rate (FDR) adjusted 
­p-values for Post-victory are reported in square brackets (Anderson 2008). The outcomes (all dummies) accounted 
for in the ­p-value adjustment are: ethnic over national identity, trust in countrymen, ­interethnic trust, like neigh-
bors from other ethnicities, dislike foreign neighbors, trust ruling party, president’s approval, and four indicators for 
the assessment of present and future own and country’s economic conditions. Sample includes respondents inter-
viewed within 15 days before and after an official game. Post-game, Post-victory, Post-draw, and Post-defeat take 
value 1 if the respondent was interviewed in the 15 days after a game, a victory, a draw, or a loss, respectively, and 
0 otherwise.


--- PAGE 13 ---
1584
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
show that the results are qualitatively similar when estimating a ­nonlinear probit 
model instead of the linear probability model used in the previous columns.
The estimated effect in column 6 is quite large: individuals interviewed after 
national team’s victories are 5.3 percentage points less likely to report a strong sense 
of ethnic identity than other respondents of the same language group interviewed 
just before; this corresponds to over a 37 percent decrease in the average probability 
of ethnic ­self-identification.
Next we examine how the effect on ethnic identification evolves in the days after 
a victory. In Figure 2, we plot the estimated coefficients and 95 percent confidence 
intervals for dummies for ­3-day periods before and after the victory. The coefficients 
are estimated from a unique regression in which we control for individual charac-
teristics, seasonal, country × match, and language group × year fixed effects. Since 
we normalize the coefficient for the three days before the victory to 0, the other 
coefficients indicate how ethnic identification changes over time relative to the eve 
of the event. The figure confirms that individuals are less likely to report a strong 
sense of ethnic identification after a victory of the national team, and indicates that 
the effect persists and, if anything, becomes stronger several days after the match. 
fans specifically is also ­well established (Wann and Dolan 1994), as is the tendency to associate with successful 
teams (Wann 2006).
Figure 2. Ethnic Identity before and after National Team’s Victories
Notes: The figure plots the coefficients and the 95 percent confidence intervals for nine dummies indicating ­3-day 
blocks from 15 days before to 15 days after a victory of the national football team. The coefficient for the period 
between 3 to 1 days before the match is normalized to 0. Confidence intervals are based on ­heteroskedasticity-robust 
standard errors clustered by country × year. The coefficients are estimated from a unique regression in which we 
control for individual characteristics, seasonal dummies, country × match and language group × year fixed effects.
−0.15
−0.1
−0.05
0
0.05
Impact on ethnic identifcation
−15
−12
−9
−6
−3
+3
+6
+9
+12
+15
Distance to the match


--- PAGE 14 ---
1585
DEPETRIS-CHAUVIN ET AL.: BUILDING NATIONS
VOL. 110 NO. 5
In contrast, ethnic identification does not seem to evolve in any particular way in the 
days prior to the match.11
C. Interpretation
What drives the effect of national team victories on strengthening national iden-
tity? To shed light on that question, we first explore what types of victories are more 
likely to affect the strength of ethnic sentiments. In the first column of Table 3, we 
look at whether friendly matches affect ethnic identity, and how this compares to the 
impact of victories in official matches documented above. The results indicate that 
victories in friendly matches, which typically have a much lower profile and attract 
relatively little attention, have virtually no effect on ethnic identification. This is 
11 Our results are robust to a number of specification checks, reported in the online Appendix. We experiment 
with (i) different levels of clustering and fixed effects combinations (online Appendix Table A.8); (ii) alternative 
time windows (online Appendix Table A.9); (iii) excluding Afrobarometer waves, countries, and matches, one at 
a time (online Appendix Figures A.3 and A.4); (iv) dealing with potentially influential matches (weighing regres-
sions by number of respondents, excluding games with relatively few or many respondents, excluding observations 
based on their DFBETA) (online Appendix Table A.10). It is also robust to using the original ­five-point measure of 
ethnic identification (not available in all rounds), when it comes to magnitudes, though with less precision (online 
Appendix Table A.11).
Table 3—National Team Victories and Ethnic Identity: Stakes and Heterogeneous Effects
Ethnic over national identity (­0–1 dummy)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
­Post-victory
0.019
−0.046
−0.054
−0.054
−0.053
−0.052
−0.058
−0.074
(0.015)
(0.016)
(0.016)
(0.015)
(0.017)
(0.015)
(0.019)
(0.016)
[0.013]
[0.006]
[0.006]
[0.006]
[0.006]
[0.009]
[0.001]
Interaction
−0.061
0.014
−0.012
0.001
0.049
−0.034
−0.280
(0.020)
(0.031)
(0.031)
(0.010)
(0.027)
(0.157)
(0.137)
[0.008]
[0.867]
[0.867]
[0.942]
[0.13]
[0.942]
[0.085]
Uninteracted term
—
—
—
—
—
−0.023
—
—
(0.012)
Interaction term
None
Rivalry
Home
game
Wide
margin
Goals
in game
State
presence
Diversity
country
Diversity 
team
Individual controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Seasonal FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Language × year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country × match FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Sample
Friendly 
matches
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline
Observations
40,392
37,060
37,060
37,060
37,060
37,060
34,450
26,186
­R2
0.087
0.104
0.104
0.104
0.104
0.104
0.107
0.113
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the country × year level in parentheses. False Discovery Rate (FDR) 
adjusted ­p-values are reported in square brackets (Anderson 2008). In addition to all the interacted models pre-
sented in this table, the following alternative heterogeneous effects were also accounted for in the ­p-value adjust-
ment (results in the online Appendix): rural status, unemployment status, gender, education, age, and being part 
of the ethnic majority. ­Post-victory takes value 1 if the respondent was interviewed within 15 days after a victory, 
0 otherwise. To ease the comparison with previous tables, variables in the interaction terms were demeaned. State 
presence is computed as the mean value of three indicators coded by Afrobarometer’s interviewer at the enumer-
ation area: presence of schools, post offices, and paved roads. National diversity is based on the ELF index from 
Fearon and Laitin (2003). Team diversity is computed as a ELF index based on the ethnic composition of the 
national team in the same year of the Afrobarometer’s wave.


--- PAGE 15 ---
1586
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
consistent with the view that ­low-stakes games are less effective than ­high-stakes 
ones at spurring patriotic fervor.
We then test the hypothesis that victories against traditional rivals are more 
consequential than other victories. To do so, we interact our ​Post-victory​ 
variable with an indicator of traditional footballing rivalries.12 The results show 
that, though all victories negatively affect ethnic identification, the effect is consid-
erably larger for victories against traditional rivals, which arguably trigger a stron-
ger emotional reaction. While this result is coming from a relatively small number 
of observations, as just under 10 percent of the sample involves rivalry matches, 
it is nevertheless consistent with the idea that national identity is strengthened in 
opposition to a salient foreign outside group.
In column 3 we focus on the heterogeneous effect of victories in matches played 
at home. The fact that the interaction term is small and not statistically significant, 
and that ​Post-victory​ is still associated with a significant decline in ethnic identifica-
tion, suggests that the effect is not driven by respondents’ direct participation in the 
event. This underlines the imagined aspect of the shared experiences triggered by 
national team performance.
In column 4 we examine whether winning by a large margin boosts pride in the 
national team and reduces ethnic identification even further. To do so, we interact 
the ​Post-victory​ dummy with a dummy for whether the team won by two goals 
or more (i.e., the top quintile of the distribution). We find a relatively small coef-
ficient, suggesting that blowouts are not more powerful in terms of shifting iden-
tities, perhaps because they are generally indicative of less competitive matches.
In column 5 we examine whether victories in matches with a large number of 
goals are associated with a larger effect. This exercise allows us to test whether 
our baseline effect is driven by enthusiasm for witnessing a particularly spectacular 
game rather than a genuine increase in national pride. Again, we find the interac-
tion to be small and insignificant, thus providing little support for this alternative 
hypothesis.
We then turn attention to whether certain segments of the population are more 
responsive to the patriotic influence of national teams’ victories. In particular, 
interacting the dummy ­Post-victory with various individual characteristics, we 
test whether the effect is larger for men versus women, for younger versus older 
cohorts, for more versus less educated individuals, for people living in rural versus 
urban areas, and for people belonging to the largest ethnic group in the country. The 
results, presented in online Appendix Table A.7, indicate that none of these attri-
butes are associated with a stronger effect of national team victories. This suggests 
that important sporting achievements influence the public as a whole, and not just 
sports fans (arguably disproportionately male), or people who are more likely to 
12 Traditional rivalries in ­sub-Saharan Africa are often determined by the existence of a shared border or pre-
vious conflict, but others are more specific to the sporting history. Specifically, the set of rivalries we identified 
is: ­Benin-Togo, Burkina ­Faso-Ivory Coast, ­Cameroon-Egypt,­ Cameroon-Nigeria, Cape ­Verde-Guinea-Bissau, 
Congo ­DR-Ghana, Congo DR-Rwanda, ­Ghana-Egypt, ­Ghana-Ivory Coast, ­Ghana-Congo DR, ­Ghana-Nigeria, 
­Guinea-Guinea-Bissau, Ivory ­Coast-Senegal, Ivory ­Coast-Mali, ­Nigeria-Algeria, ­Senegal-Nigeria, South 
­Africa-Zambia, and ­Zambia-Zimbabwe. The list is based on Wikipedia (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_
of_association_football_rivalries#CAF_zone), the Confederation of African Football website (www.cafonline.
com), and the news site Jeune Afrique (www.jeuneafrique.com).


--- PAGE 16 ---
1587
DEPETRIS-CHAUVIN ET AL.: BUILDING NATIONS
VOL. 110 NO. 5
have a coethnic in the national team (as members of the ethnic majority), or to come 
in contact with other ethnicities (arguably in urban areas).13
We can also study specifically the link between our results and ­nation building. 
In particular, we examine how the effect of national team victories depends on the 
presence of the state at the local level. We use the availability of basic public goods 
as a proxy for state presence since poor public good provision may arguably gener-
ate a sense of disconnect from the rest of the nation. Specifically, we use informa-
tion from the Afrobarometer surveys regarding the presence of public schools, post 
offices, and paved roads in the area where the respondent is located, and consider the 
average of these three indicators. As shown in column 6 of Table 3, state presence is, 
unsurprisingly, associated with reduced ethnic sentiment in general. However, state 
presence also dampens the impact of national team victories in reinforcing national 
identity over ethnic allegiances.
This result is suggestive of how different forms of nation building might interact 
with each other. The indicators that we include in our measure are very much the 
sort of public goods that are often seen as vehicles for nation building: inculca-
tion via schooling, as well as easier connection with the rest of the country. In our 
context, these seem to operate as substitutes for the impact of shared experiences: 
perhaps there is less scope for further reinforcing national identity where that has 
already been made stronger through other means.
We further test this idea by looking at how the effect of national team victo-
ries varies depending on the level of ethnic diversity in the country. To this end, in 
column 7 we interact the ​Post-victory​ dummy with ethnic diversity at the national 
level, as measured by Fearon and Laitin’s (2003) ELF index. While the negative 
coefficient on the interaction term is suggestive of a stronger effect for more diverse 
countries, the lack of precision does not allow us to say something more definitive.
Finally, we ask whether the impact of national team performance may be related 
to a “role modeling” effect: the idea that showcasing how different groups can coop-
erate to achieve success against a common foreign adversary. For that we use the 
data we collected on the ethnic composition of the national team rosters.14 Column 8 
in Table 3 shows that greater team diversity is associated with a stronger impact 
of national team victories. This additional effect is quite large: if team diversity is 
increased by one standard deviation (i.e., 0.126), the total impact of a victory would 
be approximately 50 percent larger.
13 Although the lack of a significant difference in the impact of victories between men and women may seem 
surprising at first, evidence suggests that African women are very much interested in football and very supportive 
of their national football team. For example, according to a report on “Global Interest in Football” by Nielsen 
Sports, 83 percent of Nigerians and 66 percent of South Africans report being interested in football (compared to 
67 percent in Brazil and Italy, and 61 percent in Germany). Similarly, according to a survey conducted by GeoPoll 
among African fans during the 2018 FIFA World Cup: “a majority of both male and female respondents across all 
six countries [Ghana, Nigeria, Uganda, Senegal, Kenya, and Tanzania] are aware of the occurrence of the World Cup 
this year. Across all six countries, there is no significant difference between male and female respondents regarding 
who will be watching World Cup matches” (GeoPoll 2018, p.17).
14 To construct the measure of team ethnic diversity, we first downloaded the official team rosters for the 
relevant year, as well as the basic personal information about each player, from the website https://www.­national-
football-teams.com/. We then hired ­freelancers from different ­sub-Saharan African countries and asked them to 
code the (most likely) ethnicity of each player on their country’s national football team based on (i) the player’s 
first and last name, (ii) the player’s place of birth, (iii) miscellaneous information about the player from local 
media and/or from the player’s web page (when available). In online Appendix Table A.12 we report the list of 
all the ­team-years for which we were able to collect information on players’ ethnicity.


--- PAGE 17 ---
1588
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
In sum, the analysis indicates that shared experiences help build national identity 
in specific ways that are more effective in environments where other nation-building 
strategies are less so, and that this may work through a “role modeling” mechanism.
D. National Team Victories and ­Interethnic Trust
Having shown that national team victories strengthen individual identification 
with the nation, we now turn to the question of whether they also affect the propen-
sity to trust others, and particularly those from other ethnicities. First, we look at the 
effect of victories on trust toward fellow countrymen. In column 1 of Table 4, we 
estimate our baseline specification with country × match fixed effects using trust 
in countrymen as the dependent variable. The result indicates that, following a vic-
tory of the national team, individuals become more likely to trust their compatriots. 
Specifically, interpersonal trust increases by 6.3 percentage points after a victory 
(14 percent of its mean value).
While this could in principle be consistent with a general effect of sporting success 
on ­prosocial behavior (Platow et al. 1999), in column 2 we test whether the effect 
is stronger for ­interethnic trust, using as dependent variable the ­self-reported mea-
sure of trust in people of other ethnic groups. Again the coefficient on ­Post-victory 
is positive and significant; furthermore, it is larger than the one for trust in fellow 
countrymen, which suggests a stronger effect on trust outside one’s own ethnicity. 
The sample size is considerably smaller than in our main analysis, owing to the fact 
that each trust question was only asked in a single wave of the Afrobarometer, and 
this poses a challenge from the standpoint of computing standard errors, due to the 
Table 4—National Team’s Victories and Trust in Others
Trust in 
countrymen
­Interethnic 
trust
Like neighbors 
other ethnicities
Dislike foreign
neighbors
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
­Post-victory
0.063
0.140
0.102
0.019
(0.021)
(0.040)
(0.030)
(0.018)
[0.021]
[0.018]
[0.013]
[0.387]
Individual controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Seasonal FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Language × year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country × match FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
9,355
7,973
7,511
7,497
­R2
0.140
0.169
0.162
0.153
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the country ​×​ year level in parentheses. False 
Discovery Rate (FDR) adjusted ­p-values are reported in square brackets (Anderson 2008). The 
outcomes (all dummies) accounted for in the ­p-value adjustment are: ethnic over national iden-
tity, trust in countrymen, ­interethnic trust, like neighbors from other ethnicities, dislike foreign 
neighbors, trust ruling party, president’s approval, and 4 indicators for the assessment of pres-
ent and future own and country’s economic conditions. ­Post-victory takes value 1 if the respon-
dent was interviewed in the 15 days after a victory, 0 otherwise. Trust in countrymen takes 
value 1 if respondent trusts other countrymen “somewhat” or “a lot,” 0 otherwise. ­Interethnic 
trust takes value 1 if respondent trusts “somewhat” or “a lot” people of other ethnicities, 0 oth-
erwise. Like neighbors other ethnicities takes value 1 if respondent would “like” or “strongly 
like” having neighbors from other ethnicities, 0 otherwise. Dislike foreign neighbors takes 
value 1 if respondent would “dislike” or “strongly dislike” having immigrants or foreign work-
ers as neighbors, 0 otherwise. For ordered probit estimates, see online Appendix Table A.19.


--- PAGE 18 ---
1589
DEPETRIS-CHAUVIN ET AL.: BUILDING NATIONS
VOL. 110 NO. 5
relatively small number of clusters. It is thus particularly important to note that the 
magnitude of the estimated coefficient is economically meaningful, as it represents 
an increase in ­interethnic trust equivalent to 30 percent of its mean value in our 
sample.
To further test for the effect on the willingness to interact with members of other 
ethnic groups, in column 3 we use as dependent variable the response to the question 
on whether the respondent would like to have ­noncoethnic neighbors. Consistent 
with the previous findings, national team victories improve respondents’ reported 
inclination to live near other ethnicities.
This raises the natural question of whether the more favorable attitudes toward 
­noncoethnic fellow citizens come at the expense of attitudes toward foreigners. It 
seems quite plausible that the effect of sporting success on national identity is built 
in opposition to the outside groups being confronted on the football pitch (Heinilä 
1985, Hargreaves 1992). For this we take advantage, in column 4, of a similar ques-
tion on preferences regarding neighbors, from Round 6 of the Afrobarometer, asking 
about immigrants and foreign workers. The point estimate indicates a 10 percent 
increase in dislike for foreigners as neighbors, relative to the sample average, but 
precision is relatively low. While we cannot rule out a quantitatively meaningful 
impact, the evidence does not particularly support the interpretation that strength-
ened national identity within the country comes at the price of increased animosity 
toward outsiders.
E. National Team Victories and Other Attitudes
An important question is whether weaker ethnic identity and higher ­interethnic 
trust reflect a genuine change in attitudes in that domain, or rather a generally 
euphoric mood due to the national team’s achievements. In particular, it could be 
the case that the impact of sporting achievements could work through a strictly indi-
vidual positive predisposition or perception of increased ­well-being (as in Edmans, 
García, and Norli 2007 or Eren and Mocan 2018), as opposed to (the perception of) 
a shared collective experience between fellow citizens.
One way to test this alternative hypothesis is to examine whether victories are 
also associated with changes in other attitudes unrelated to ethnic sentiments: we 
would expect that the positive individual sentiment would spill over to dimensions 
other than ethnic identity. In online Appendix Table A.13 we find that victories do 
not increase respondents’ trust in the ruling party or the approval rate of the pres-
ident, indicating that ­football-driven patriotic shocks do not necessarily translate 
into generally more positive political attitudes and into higher support for incum-
bent rulers, at least in the ­sub-Saharan African context.15 Neither does the effect of 
national team victories seem to be driven by general euphoria or optimism, as we 
find no impact on whether a respondent reports having a positive assessment of the 
country’s current economic conditions, positive expectations of whether they will 
improve in the near future, or positive assessments of their own living conditions 
(see online Appendix Tables A.14 through A.18). While national team victories 
15 Evidence that sports victories or losses, and the resulting euphoria or disappointment, can affect support for 
incumbents is available, for example, from Healy, Malhotra, and Mo (2010) and Corbi (2018).


--- PAGE 19 ---
1590
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
could certainly have a general “­warm-glow” effect on individuals, the evidence here 
seems consistent with a role played by the shared collective experience as such.
III.  ­Country-Level Analysis
The results presented so far indicate that ­football-driven positive shocks contrib-
ute to lower ethnic identification and decreased ­interethnic mistrust. An important 
related question is whether those shocks may also reduce actual violence, and how 
­long-lasting this effect may be. An extensive literature has documented the links 
between ethnicity and civil conflict (Fearon and Laitin 2003, Doyle and Sambanis 
2006), and noted that ethnic identity can both affect and be affected by conflict 
(Horowitz 2001, Sambanis and Shayo 2013).
To shed light on this issue we analyze how civil conflict in ­sub-Saharan African 
countries evolves following important achievements of the national football teams. 
For this, we need to focus on achievements that are sufficiently important that they 
would conceivably have a detectable impact on the prevalence of conflict.
A. Empirical Strategy
We exploit ­quasi-experimental variation in whether a team qualified for the tour-
nament phase of the Africa Cup of Nations (ACN), the most important continen-
tal competition for African national teams, which generates widespread popular 
attention. The ACN involves two phases: (i) a qualifying stage in which all teams 
compete, and (ii) a final (or tournament) stage in which only the teams that ranked 
highest in the qualifying round compete for the title. In the qualifying round teams 
are divided into groups, each team plays each of the others twice (one at home and 
one away) with each match assigning a certain number of points, and the team(s) 
with the most points (usually one or two) qualify to the final round. The qualifying 
stage is usually very competitive, and qualification is often decided only in the last 
match day based on just a narrow point margin or goal difference.16
Our strategy consists in (i) identifying teams in the same group that, until the last 
match day of the group stage, were both in a position to qualify, but one of which 
barely did while the other did not, and (ii) compare the evolution of conflict in the 
two countries in the six months before and after the qualification.17
Our identification strategy is summarized by the following equation:
(2)  ​Con​f​c,q,t​  =  α + βPost-​Qual​c,q,t​ +  ​ ∑ 
k=1
​ 
4
  ​δ​ k​Conf​c,q,t−k​ + ​ ∑ 
t=−25
​ 
25
  ​Γ​t​ + ​Π​t​ + ​Δ​c,q​ + ​ε​c,q​​ ,
16 The qualification phase for the 2013 ACN did not involve a group stage, but rather sequential ­two-legged 
­knock-out pairs. We thus consider in our analysis only the last match of the final ­two-legged ­knock-out stage. 
Our quantitative and qualitative results do not depend on the inclusion of the 2013 qualification phase (see online 
Appendix Figure A.7).
17 Qualification to the WC provides a potentially similar experiment, but poses challenges regarding the defini-
tion of control and treatment groups (e.g., Angola barely qualified to the ACN in 1997, while barely missing out on 
the WC in the same year) and adds relatively little variation. This is because, in addition to the WC only happening 
every four years, there are few spots for African countries (five, since 1998). What is more, most of those are typi-
cally taken by a very small number of historically strong teams, many of which are from North Africa. In any case, 
we will discuss the implications of including WC qualifiers into the sample, and show that results are in line with 
the ACN results, though with interesting exceptions that help shed light on mechanisms.


--- PAGE 20 ---
1591
DEPETRIS-CHAUVIN ET AL.: BUILDING NATIONS
VOL. 110 NO. 5
where ​c, q​, and ​t​ denote country, qualification, and week to and since qualification 
(−25 to +25). The variable ​Conf​ is a measure of conflict intensity; ​Post-Qual​, our 
regressor of interest, is a dummy variable that equals 1 for countries of teams that 
qualified only in the weeks after qualification, and 0 otherwise; ​∑ t=−25​ 
25 
​ ​Γ​t​​ is a set of 
dummies for each of the weeks before and after the qualification, while ​​Π​t​​ and ​​Δ​c,q​​ 
are ­calendar-month and country × qualification campaign fixed effects, respec-
tively. To control for possible auto correlation in conflict events, we also control for 
the occurrence of conflict in the previous weeks (up to four). (Note that our number 
of periods is sufficiently large (50), so that the typical Nickell bias (Nickell 1981) 
from combining lagged dependent variable and fixed effects is less of a concern.) 
­Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are clustered by country × qualification 
campaign.
Close Qualification to ACN.—Our key comparison is between countries that 
barely qualified to the ACN finals (our treatment group) and those that did not (our 
control group). The underlying identification assumption is that if two teams in the 
same group got to the last match day with concrete chances of qualifying, which one 
would actually qualify will be determined by ­quasi-random circumstances, such as a 
goal scored in the final minutes of the last match by one side or the other. One exam-
ple of such scenario, depicted in Figure 3, is available from 2012, when three teams 
in qualifying group A, Mali, Zimbabwe, and Cape Verde, were in position to qualify 
until the last match day while only one team, Liberia, was already eliminated. In the 
last two matches while Cape Verde defeated Zimbabwe, Mali was not able to beat 
Liberia but still managed to qualify due to a ­one-goal difference. In this case Mali 
would be included in the treatment group while both Cape Verde and Zimbabwe in 
the control group.
After we exclude countries that had already qualified or had no shot at qualifying 
by the time of the last match, we end up with 49 ­country-qualification campaign 
pairs in the treatment group, and 60 in the control group. (The full list is in online 
Figure 3. Example of Close Qualification: Group A, ACN 2012


--- PAGE 21 ---
1592
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
Appendix Table A.20.) We test whether the two groups are balanced along a range 
of characteristics that may affect conflict. As shown in online Appendix Table A.21, 
the only variable that is unbalanced (at the 10 percent level) is population density, 
which is somewhat lower for treatment than for control countries. Still, in our empir-
ical analysis we will control for country × qualification campaign fixed effects, 
which account for all observable and unobservable factors specific to a country, in a 
given year, that may affect conflict.
B. Close Qualification to ACN and Conflict
We now turn to the effect of national teams’ (close) qualification on conflict, 
using data from ACLED on the occurrence and severity of violent conflict events in 
­sub-Saharan African countries between 1997 and 2015, and focusing on the months 
before and after each ACN qualification campaign.
Our key results are in Table 5. We start by estimating, in column 1, our base-
line specification with country × qualifying campaign, week since qualification, 
and ­calendar-month fixed effects (equation (2)), using as dependent variable the 
log of the number of conflict events that occurred in the country in a given week. 
The results indicate that the number of conflict events is significantly lower in the 
months following the qualification. The effect remains largely unchanged in col-
umn 2 where we control for conflict in each of the previous four weeks.
The effect is quantitatively sizable: the point estimate from column 2 indicates 
that countries whose teams barely qualified to the ACN experience a reduction of 
8.6 percent in the number of conflict episodes (i.e., ​100 × (​e​ −0.09​ − 1)​), relative to 
countries whose teams barely did not. The table also reports the ­long-run impact of 
the qualification, which takes into account the effect of a reduction in today’s con-
flict on future violence.18 In the online Appendix, we show that results are robust 
when we use as dependent variable a dummy for the occurrence of conflict events, 
or the number of conflict victims (online Appendix Tables A.22 and A.23), that 
no particular country, ACN qualification process, or ­country-qualification campaign 
drives our main results (online Appendix Figures A.7 and A.8), and that they hold 
when we weigh observations using country population as of 1990 (online Appendix 
Table A.24) .
To further corroborate our identification strategy, we estimate a variant of 
equation  (2) pooling observations for treatment and control groups and assign-
ing a fictitious treatment, to countries that will eventually qualify, in the ­12-week 
period before qualification. If conflict was evolving differently in the two 
groups in the ­pre-qualification period, which would threaten the validity of our 
­difference-in-differences approach, we would expect the fictitious treatment to 
display a significant coefficient. The results, in columns 3 and 4 of Table 5, point 
against this possibility. In particular, there is no indication that conflict was decreas-
ing in countries that would eventually qualify, relative to countries that would not.
How persistent is this effect? To examine that, we ­re-estimate our specifica-
tions splitting the ­post-qualification period in two ­subperiods: the first 12 weeks 
18 Specifically, using point estimates from equation (2), the ­long-run impact is computed as ​​β ˆ ​/(1 − ​∑ k=1​ 
4  ​δ ˆ ​​ k​)​. 
Standard errors for estimates of ­long-run impacts are computed using the “delta method.”


--- PAGE 22 ---
1593
DEPETRIS-CHAUVIN ET AL.: BUILDING NATIONS
VOL. 110 NO. 5
after qualification, and the subsequent 13 weeks. We see a reduction in conflict of 
a similar magnitude for the two periods (columns 5 and 6). Columns 7 and 8 then 
show that we obtain analogous results from maximum likelihood negative binomial 
regressions, with the number of events as the dependent variable, showing that the 
message does not hinge on the log functional form. Additionally, online Appendix 
Table A.25 show that our main results hold when we use an hyperbolic sine inverse 
transformation of the dependent variable.
Figure 4 provides graphical evidence of the impact of qualification on conflict 
events, as well as its persistence, with online Appendix Figures A.5 and A.6 showing 
analogous plots for the probability of conflict and number of fatalities. In panel A, 
we plot the estimated coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals of the interac-
tion terms between the treatment variable and dummies for 11 ­four-week periods in 
the months before and after the qualification, with the coefficient on the ­four-week 
periods immediately before qualification normalized to 0, to facilitate interpretation. 
The results indicate clearly that the number of conflict events decreases sharply in 
the weeks following the qualification to the ACN tournament, and remains negative 
though with some convergence after three months; in fact, the coefficients are sig-
nificantly negative for up to five months for the conflict dummy, as can be seen in 
Table 5—ACN Qualification and Conflict
Dependent variable
log(1 + number of events)
Number of events
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
­Post-qualification
−0.131
−0.090
−0.307
−0.227
(0.064)
(0.039)
(0.156)
(0.127)
12 weeks 
  before qualification
0.046
0.028
(0.062)
(0.054)
1–12 weeks post-qualification (a)
−0.124
−0.098
(0.064)
(0.038)
13–25 weeks post-qualification (b)
−0.137
−0.083
(0.081)
(0.053)
­Long-run impact
−0.131
−0.145
0.046
0.034
—
—
—
—
(0.064)
(0.065)
(0.062)
(0.065)
—
—
—
—
Pr  >  F ​​H​0​​: a  =  b
—
—
—
—
0.856
0.750
—
—
Regression method
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
Negative binomial
Country × qualification campaign
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Week FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
­Calendar-month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
4 lags of dependent variable
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Pr  >  F ​​H​0​​: 4 lags jointly  =  0
—
0.00
—
0.00
—
0.00
—
0.00
Observations
5,450
5,014
2,725
2,289
5,450
5,014
5,450
5,014
Within R2
0.004
0.080
0.000
0.025
0.004
0.080
—
—
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the country × qualification campaign level. Sample in 
columns 1–2 covers 25 weeks before the end of qualification process (i.e., ­pre-treatment period) for 109 country 
× qualification campaign. The variable 12 weeks before qualification takes value 1 during the 12 weeks immedi-
ately before the end of the qualification process for the countries that will eventually qualify to the ACN, 0 other-
wise. The sample for columns 3–8 includes the 25 weeks before and after the close qualification for 109 country 
× qualification campaign. The variable ­Post-qualification takes value 1 for the team that qualified for the weeks 
after the qualification and 0 otherwise. The variable ­13–25 weeks ­post-qualification takes value 1 starting the thir-
teenth week after the end of the qualification process for the countries that barely qualify to the ACN, 0 otherwise. 
Pr  >  F ​H​0​: a  =  b refers to the ­F-tests with the null hypothesis ­1–12 weeks ­post-qualification  =  ­13–25 weeks 
­post-qualification. Conflict data come from the ACLED dataset.


--- PAGE 23 ---
1594
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
Figure 4. Number of Conflict Episodes before and after Qualification
Notes: Panel A plots coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals for interactions between the dummy for coun-
tries that barely qualified to the ACN and 11 dummies for ­4-week period included between 25 weeks before and 
after the qualification. The regressions also include week FE, ­calendar-month FE, and country × qualifier dummies. 
Panel B plots coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals for 11 dummies for ­4-week period included between 
25 weeks before and after the qualification for the groups of countries that barely qualified to the ACN. The regres-
sions ­calendar-month FE and country × qualifier dummies (week FE are omitted to avoid perfect multicollinearity). 
Panel C replicates Panel B for the groups of countries that barely did not qualify to the ACN. The dependent vari-
able in all regressions is log(1 + number of conflict events). The coefficients for the 4 weeks immediately before 
the end of the qualification process are normalized to 0. Confidence intervals are based on ­heteroskedasticity-robust 
standard errors clustered by country × qualifier.
−0.4
−0.2
0.2
0
Impact on confict intensity
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
−0.2
0.2
0
Impact on confict intensity
Impact on confict intensity
−6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1
1
2
3
4
5
6
Months from qualifcation game
−6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1
1
2
3
4
5
6
Months from qualifcation game
−6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1
1
2
3
4
5
6
Months from qualifcation game
Panel A. Pooled (4-week bandwidths)
Panel B. Treatment countries (4-week bandwidths)
Panel C. Control countries (4-week bandwidths)


--- PAGE 24 ---
1595
DEPETRIS-CHAUVIN ET AL.: BUILDING NATIONS
VOL. 110 NO. 5
online Appendix Figure A.5. The coefficients for the periods before qualification, 
in contrast, are very close to 0, confirming the absence of any differential trend in 
countries that would later qualify.
An interesting related question is whether the difference between the two differ-
ent groups of countries is driven by a reduction in conflict among qualifiers, or alter-
natively by an increase in conflict among ­nonqualifiers. While either would lead to 
the pattern detected in our results, they would obviously have rather different impli-
cations. As we see in panels B and C of Figure 4, the evidence shows a pattern of 
decreased conflict in the former group, and no corresponding increase in the latter.
In sum, these findings provide robust evidence that important achievements of the 
national team can contribute to reducing violence in a tangible and rather persistent 
way.
C. “Unexpected ” Qualification
We then examine whether unexpected qualifications have a stronger effect on 
conflict. Indeed, it seems plausible that qualification to the ACN tournament may be 
perceived as an especially important achievement for teams that never qualified in 
the past or that had not qualified in a long time, as opposed to teams that usually do. 
This would be in line with previous findings on the effect of sports results on vio-
lence and crime which indicate that unexpected outcomes are more consequential 
than expected ones (Card and Dahl 2011; Munyo and Rossi 2013).
To test this hypothesis, in Table 6 we estimate our baseline specification separately 
for (i) countries that had not qualified in three years or more (i.e., the sample mean) 
and (ii) countries that had never qualified. We also estimate our baseline specifica-
tion for the full sample adding interaction terms accounting for these “unexpected 
qualifications.” Though relatively imprecise, the results suggest that the reduction in 
conflict is indeed stronger in the case of overdue and ­first-time qualifications. This 
is also true for the probability of conflict and number of fatalities, as can be seen in 
online Appendix Tables A.26 and A.27 (with the exception of the impact ­of first-
time qualification on number of fatalities for which we find statistically insignificant 
coefficient for the interaction term).
This pattern also sheds light on the alternative natural experiment induced by 
WC qualification. Online Appendix Table A.28 shows that including instances of 
­last-round qualification for the WC into our sample seems to weaken the results. 
The table also shows, however, that this is entirely driven by Cameroon and Nigeria, 
which are by far the most regular ­sub-Saharan African WC participants.19 This 
underlines the point that a close qualification constitutes a very different kind of 
shock in countries that regularly qualify: in fact, late qualification might well be per-
ceived not as a positive shock, in these cases, but rather as a relative disappointment.
19 Specifically, in the entire history of the WC, there have been 44 African participants. ­Sub-Saharan Africa 
accounts for only 27 of those; out of these, Cameroon and Nigeria account for 7 and 6, respectively, with Ghana, 
Ivory Coast, and South Africa next with 3 each. In total, a mere 9 ­sub-Saharan African countries have ever qualified 
(with one, Zaire, only way back in 1974).


--- PAGE 25 ---
1596
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
D. Ethnic Conflict
Is the impact on conflict related to the role of ethnic identity? To shed light 
on that, in Table 7 we investigate the effect of qualification to the ACN tourna-
ment on conflict events classified as ethnically related, according to the procedure 
described in Section IC. In column 1, corresponding to our most comprehensive 
specification, with country × qualifier, ­calendar-month, and week fixed effects 
and lags of conflict, we find that a national team’s qualification to the ACN finals 
reduced the number of conflict events. (Once again, the results also hold for preva-
lence of conflict and number of fatalities, as shown in online Appendix Tables A.29 
and A.30.) Though smaller than for overall conflict, the effect is sizable, with the 
qualification reducing the intensity of ethnic violence by 3 percent in the ­long run.
To further interrogate the mechanism, we can exploit the information on the spa-
tial location of different conflict episodes. In particular, we can consider the ethnic 
characteristics of the conflict areas, by matching them to ethnic homelands. In col-
umns 2 and 3, we consider the degree of national political power of the local ethnic 
group, as classified by the Ethnic Power Relations (EPR) dataset. In particular, we 
distinguish conflict events occurring in areas inhabited by politically strong groups 
(“monopoly” or “dominant” groups, according to EPR) from those in places inhab-
ited by politically weak ones (“discriminated,” “powerless,” or “­self-excluded”). 
While keeping in mind the caveat that the strength of different ethnic groups is 
endogenous, we do see a more pronounced effect in the latter case, which is where 
we would expect issues of national identity to be more fraught.
Table 6—Overdue and First Qualification Effects
log(1 + number of events)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
­Post-qualification
−0.090
−0.153
−0.087
−0.273
−0.099
(0.039)
(0.070)
(0.043)
(0.137)
(0.042)
­Post-qualification × overdue
−0.148
(0.088)
­Post-qualification × first time
−0.226
(0.176)
Pr  >  F
—
—
0.10
—
0.07
Sample
Full
Overdue 
qualification
Full
First 
qualification
Full
Country × qualification campaign FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Week FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
­Calendar-month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
4 lags of dependent variable
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Pr  >  F ​H​0​: 4 lags jointly  =  0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Observations
5,014
2,438
5,014
736
5,014
Within R2
0.080
0.097
0.081
0.124
0.081
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at the country × qualification campaign level. Sample cov-
ers +/− 25 weeks around the end of qualification process. ­Post-qualification takes value 1 during the 25 weeks fol-
lowing the qualification to ACN, 0 otherwise. Conflict data come from the ACLED dataset. An overdue (­first-time) 
qualification is defined as reaching the last ­match-day with chances of qualifying to the ACN finals after 3 or more 
years (for the very first time). See online Appendix Table A.20. Pr  >  F refers to the ­F-tests with the null hypoth-
esis that coefficients for ­post-qualification and its interaction with overdue (column 3) or ­first-time qualification 
(column 5) are jointly equal to 0. Interaction terms were demeaned to ease the comparison of uninteracted terms.
