

--- PAGE 1 ---
American Economic Review 2020, 110(5): 1502–1539 
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20172040
1502
Do Parents Value School Effectiveness?†
By Atila Abdulkadiroˇglu, Parag A. Pathak, 
Jonathan Schellenberg, and Christopher R. Walters*
School choice may lead to improvements in school productivity if 
parents’ choices reward effective schools and punish ineffective ones. 
This mechanism requires parents to choose schools based on causal 
effectiveness rather than peer characteristics. We study relation-
ships among parent preferences, peer quality, and causal effects on 
outcomes for applicants to New York City’s centralized high school 
assignment mechanism. We use applicants’ ­rank-ordered choice 
lists to measure preferences and to construct ­selection-corrected 
estimates of treatment effects on test scores, high school gradua-
tion, college attendance, and college quality. Parents prefer schools 
that enroll ­high-achieving peers, and these schools generate larger 
improvements in short- and ­long-run student outcomes. Preferences 
are unrelated to school effectiveness and academic match quality 
after controlling for peer quality. (JEL D12, H75, I21, I26, I28)
Recent education reforms in the United States, including charter schools, school 
vouchers, and ­district-wide open enrollment plans, increase parents’ power to 
choose schools for their children. School choice allows households to avoid undesir-
able schools and forces schools to satisfy parents’ preferences or risk losing enroll-
ment. Proponents of choice argue that this competitive pressure is likely to generate 
­system-wide increases in school productivity and boost educational outcomes for 
students (Friedman 1962, Chubb and Moe 1990, Hoxby 2003). By decentralizing 
school quality assessment and allowing parents to act on local information, school 
choice is conjectured to provide better incentives for educational effectiveness than 
* Abdulkadiroˇglu: Duke University, and NBER (email: aa88@duke.edu); Pathak: Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, and NBER (email: ppathak@mit.edu); Schellenberg: University of California, Berkeley (email: 
jschellenberg@econ.berkeley.edu); Walters: University of California, Berkeley, and NBER (email: crwalters@
econ.berkeley.edu). Thomas Lemieux was the coeditor for this article. We gratefully acknowledge funding from 
the National Science Foundation and the W. T. Grant Foundation. We also thank Nikhil Agarwal, Josh Angrist, 
Stephane Bonhomme, David Card, David Chan, Michael Dinerstein, Will Dobbie, James Heckman, Peter Hull, 
Pat Kline, Thibaut Lamadon, Magne Mogstad, Jack Mountjoy, Derek Neal, Ariel Pakes, Stephen Raudenbush, 
Jesse Rothstein, Alex Torgovitsky, Miguel Urquiola, Jeffrey Wooldridge, Danny Yagan, Seth Zimmerman, and 
seminar participants at the University of Chicago Committee on Education Workshop, the University of Chicago 
Harris School, UC Berkeley, the University of Chicago Econometrics Lunch, the University of Chicago Interactions 
Conference, UW Madison, the 2017 NBER Labor Studies fall meetings, the University of Virginia, the University of 
Hawaii, the University of Rochester, Princeton University, the University of Maryland, and Arizona State University 
for suggestions and comments. We’re grateful to Ray Han and Kate Bradley for outstanding research assistance, and 
to Eryn Heying for invaluable administrative support.
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20172040 to visit the article page for additional materials and author  
disclosure statements.


--- PAGE 2 ---
1503
ABDULKADIRO ˇGLU ET AL.: DO PARENTS VALUE SCHOOL EFFECTIVENESS?
VOL. 110 NO. 5
could be achieved by a centralized accountability system (Peterson and Campbell 
2001). Choice may also improve outcomes by allowing students to sort into schools 
that suit their particular educational needs, resulting in improved match quality 
(Hoxby 2000). These arguments have motivated recent policy efforts to expand 
school choice (e.g., DeVos 2017).
If choice is to improve educational effectiveness, parents’ choices must result in 
rewards for effective schools and sanctions for ineffective ones. Our use of the term 
“effective” follows Rothstein (2006): an effective school is one that generates causal 
improvements in student outcomes. Choice need not improve school effectiveness 
if it is not the basis for how parents choose between schools. For example, parents 
may value attributes such as facilities, convenience, student satisfaction, or peer 
composition in a manner that does not align with educational impacts (Hanushek 
1981, Jacob and Lefgren 2007). Moreover, while models in which parents value 
schools according to their effectiveness are an important benchmark in the academic 
literature (e.g., Epple, Figlio, and Romano 2004), it may be difficult for parents to 
separate a school’s effectiveness from the composition of its student body (Kane 
and Staiger 2002). If parent choices reward schools that recruit ­higher-achieving 
students rather than schools that improve outcomes, school choice may increase 
resources devoted to screening and selection rather than better instruction (Ladd 
2002, MacLeod and Urquiola 2015). Consistent with these possibilities, Rothstein 
(2006) shows that ­cross-district relationships among school choice, sorting patterns, 
and student outcomes fail to match the predictions of a model in which school effec-
tiveness is the primary determinant of parent preferences.
This paper offers new evidence on the links between preferences, school effec-
tiveness, and peer quality based on choice and outcome data for more than 250,000 
applicants in New York City’s centralized high school assignment mechanism. Each 
year, thousands of New York City high school applicants ­rank-order schools, and 
the mechanism assigns students to schools using the deferred acceptance (DA) algo-
rithm (Gale and Shapley 1962; Abdulkadiroˇglu, Pathak, and Roth 2005). The DA 
mechanism is ­strategy-proof: truthfully ranking schools is a weakly dominant strat-
egy for students (Dubins and Freedman 1981, Roth 1982). This fact motivates our 
assumption that applicants’ rankings measure their true preferences for schools.1 
We summarize these preferences by fitting discrete choice models to applicants’ 
­rank-ordered preference lists.
We then combine the preference estimates with estimates of school treatment 
effects on test scores, high school graduation, college attendance, and college 
choice. Treatment effect estimates come from “­value-added” regression models of 
the sort commonly used to measure causal effects of teachers and schools (Todd and 
Wolpin 2003; Koedel, Mihaly, and Rockoff 2015). We generalize the conventional 
­value-added approach to allow for match effects in academic outcomes and to relax 
the ­selection-on-observables assumption underlying standard models. Recent evi-
dence suggests that ­value-added models controlling only for observables provide 
1 As we discuss in Section I, DA is ­strategy-proof when students are allowed to rank every school, but the 
New York City mechanism only allows applicants to rank 12 choices. Most students do not fill their preference 
lists, however, and truthful ranking is a dominant strategy in this situation (Haeringer and Klijn 2009, Pathak and 
Sönmez 2013). Fack, Grenet, and He (2015) proposes empirical approaches to measuring student preferences with-
out requiring that ­truth-telling is the unique equilibrium.


--- PAGE 3 ---
1504
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
­quantitatively useful but biased estimates of causal effects due to selection on unob-
servables (Rothstein 2010, 2017; Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff 2014a; Angrist 
et al. 2017). We therefore use the rich information on preferences contained in stu-
dents’ ­rank-ordered choice lists to correct our estimates for selection on unobserv-
ables. This selection correction is implemented by extending the classic multinomial 
logit control function estimator of Dubin and McFadden (1984) to a setting where 
rankings of multiple alternatives are known. We show that predictions from our 
models match the effects of randomized lottery assignment for a subset of schools 
where lottery ­quasi-experiments are available, suggesting that our methods provide 
accurate measures of causal effects.
The final step of our analysis relates the choice model and treatment effect esti-
mates to measure preferences for school effectiveness. The choice and outcome 
models we estimate allow preferences and causal effects to vary flexibly with stu-
dent characteristics. Our specifications accommodate the possibility that schools 
are more effective for specific types of students and that applicants choose schools 
that are a good match for their student type. We compare the degree to which parent 
preferences are explained by overall school effectiveness, match quality, and peer 
quality, defined as the component of a school’s average outcome due to selection 
rather than effectiveness. We explore these relationships for test scores as well as 
­longer-run postsecondary outcomes, which is important in view of recent evidence 
that school quality is ­multidimensional and only imperfectly measured by effects on 
test scores (Beuermann et al. 2018).
We find preferences are positively correlated with both peer quality and causal 
effects on student outcomes. More effective schools enroll ­higher-ability students, 
however, and preferences are unrelated to school effectiveness after controlling 
for peer quality. We also find little evidence of selection on match effects: on bal-
ance, parents do not prefer schools that are especially effective for their own chil-
dren, and students do not enroll in schools that are a ­better-than-average match. 
These patterns are similar for ­short-run achievement test scores and ­longer-run 
postsecondary outcomes. Looking across demographic and baseline achievement 
groups, we find no evidence that any subgroup places positive weight on school 
effectiveness once we adjust for peer quality. Our estimates are also similar across 
applicant cohorts, suggesting that the relationship between demand and effective-
ness is stable over time.
The factors driving school popularity we uncover are noteworthy, but to trans-
late them into implications about the incentives that schools face from ­demand-side 
forces requires isolating the causal impacts of school attributes on preferences. Since 
effectiveness and peer quality are not randomly assigned to schools, our estimates 
need not capture causal effects of these attributes on preferences if other school 
characteristics that influence demand are correlated with effectiveness or peer qual-
ity. We assess the potential for such omitted variables bias by conditioning on other 
school characteristics that predict demand, including measures of violent incidents, 
teacher education, and the school learning environment. This analysis reveals that 
parents prefer safer schools and schools with more educated teachers, but adding 
these covariates does not alter our main results characterizing the partial correla-
tions between preferences, peer quality, and school effectiveness. This robustness 
exercise provides some reassurance that our estimates capture causal impacts of 


--- PAGE 4 ---
1505
ABDULKADIRO ˇGLU ET AL.: DO PARENTS VALUE SCHOOL EFFECTIVENESS?
VOL. 110 NO. 5
effectiveness on demand, though we cannot completely rule out the possibility that 
peer quality and school effectiveness are correlated with other unobservables.
It is worth cautioning that our findings do not mean that parents choose schools 
irrationally; they may use peer characteristics to proxy for school effectiveness if 
the latter is difficult to observe, or value peer quality independently of impacts on 
academic outcomes. Either way, our results imply that parents’ choices penalize 
schools that enroll low achievers rather than schools that offer poor instruction. As 
a result, school choice programs may generate stronger incentives for screening and 
selection than for improved academic quality. We provide suggestive evidence that 
schools have responded to these incentives by increasing screening in the years fol-
lowing the introduction of centralized assignment in New York City.
Our analysis complements Rothstein’s (2006) indirect test with a direct assess-
ment of the relationships among parent preferences, peer quality, and school effec-
tiveness based on unusually rich choice and outcome data. The results also contribute 
to a large literature studying preferences for school quality (Black 1999; Figlio and 
Lucas 2004; Bayer, Ferreira, and McMillan 2007; Hastings and Weinstein 2008; 
Burgess et al. 2015; Imberman and Lovenheim 2016). These studies show that hous-
ing prices and household choices respond to school performance levels, but they 
do not typically separate responses to causal school effectiveness and peer quality. 
Our findings are also relevant to theoretical and empirical research on the impli-
cations of school choice for sorting and stratification (Epple and Romano 1998; 
Epple, Figlio, and Romano 2004; Hsieh and Urquiola 2006; Barseghyan, Clark, 
and Coate 2014; Altonji, Huang, and Taber 2015; Avery and Pathak 2015; MacLeod 
and Urquiola 2015; MacLeod et al. 2017). In addition, our results help to reconcile 
some surprising findings from recent studies of school choice. Cullen, Jacob, and 
Levitt (2006) finds limited achievement effects of admission to preferred schools 
in Chicago, while Walters (2018) documents that disadvantaged students in Boston 
are less likely to apply to charter schools than more advantaged students despite 
experiencing larger achievement benefits. Angrist, Pathak, and Walters (2013) and 
Abdulkadiroˇglu, Pathak, and Walters (2018) report on two settings where parents 
opt for schools that reduce student achievement. These patterns are consistent with 
our finding that school choices are not driven by school effectiveness.
Finally, our analysis adds to a recent series of studies leveraging preference data 
from centralized school assignment mechanisms to investigate school demand 
(Hastings, Kane, and Staiger 2009; Harris and Larsen 2014; Fack, Grenet, and He 
2015; Abdulkadiroˇglu, Agarwal, and Pathak 2017; Glazerman and Dotter 2016; 
Kapor, Neilson, and Zimmerman 2017; Agarwal and Somaini 2018). Some of these 
studies analyze assignment mechanisms that provide incentives to strategically mis-
report preferences, while others measure academic quality using average test scores 
rather than distinguishing between peer quality and school effectiveness or look-
ing at ­longer-run outcomes. We build on this previous work by using data from a 
­strategy-proof mechanism to separately estimate preferences for peer quality and 
causal effects on multiple measures of academic performance.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes school 
choice in New York City and the data used for our analysis. Section II develops 
a conceptual framework for analyzing school effectiveness and peer quality, and 
Section  III details our empirical approach. Section  IV summarizes estimated 


--- PAGE 5 ---
1506
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
distributions of student preferences and school treatment effects. Section V links 
­preferences to peer quality and school effectiveness, and Section VI discusses impli-
cations of these relationships. Section VII concludes and offers some directions for 
future research.
I.  Setting and Data
A. New York City High Schools
The New York City public school district annually enrolls roughly 90,000 ninth 
graders at more than 400 high schools. Rising ninth graders planning to attend New 
York City’s public high schools submit applications to the centralized assignment 
system. Before 2003 the district used an uncoordinated school assignment process in 
which students could receive offers from more than one school. Motivated in part by 
insights derived from the theory of market design, in 2003 the city adopted a coordi-
nated ­single-offer assignment mechanism based on the ­student-proposing deferred 
acceptance (DA) algorithm (Gale and Shapley 1962; Abdulkadiroˇglu, Pathak, and 
Roth 2005, 2009). Abdulkadiroˇglu, Agarwal, and Pathak (2017) shows that intro-
ducing coordinated assignment reduced the share of administratively assigned stu-
dents and likely improved average student welfare.
Applicants report their preferences for schooling options to the assignment mech-
anism by submitting ­rank-ordered lists of up to 12 academic programs. An individual 
school may operate more than one program. To aid families in their ­decision-making, 
the New York City Department of Education (DOE) distributes a directory that pro-
vides an overview of the high school admission process, key dates, and an information 
page for each high school. A school’s information page includes a brief statement of 
its mission, a list of offered programs, courses and extracurricular activities, pass rates 
on New York Regents standardized tests, and the school’s graduation rate (New York 
City Department of Education 2003). DOE also issues annual schools reports that list 
basic demographics, teacher characteristics, school expenditures, and Regents perfor-
mance levels. During the time period of our study (­2003–2007) these reports did not 
include measures of test score growth, though such measures have been added more 
recently (New York City Department of Education 2004, 2017).
Academic programs prioritize applicants in the centralized admission sys-
tem using a mix of factors. Priorities depend on whether a program is classified 
as unscreened, screened, or an educational option program. Unscreened programs 
give priority to students based on residential zones and (in some cases) to those 
who attend an information session. Screened programs use these factors and may 
also assign priorities based on prior grades, standardized test scores, and atten-
dance. Educational option programs use screened criteria for some of their seats and 
unscreened criteria for the rest. Random numbers are used to order applicants with 
equal priority. A small group of selective high schools, including New York City’s 
exam schools, admit students in a parallel system outside the main round of the 
assignment process (Abdulkadiroˇglu, Angrist, and Pathak 2014).
The DA algorithm combines student preferences with program priorities to gen-
erate a single program assignment for each student. In the initial step of the algo-
rithm, each student proposes to her ­first-choice program. Programs provisionally 


--- PAGE 6 ---
1507
ABDULKADIRO ˇGLU ET AL.: DO PARENTS VALUE SCHOOL EFFECTIVENESS?
VOL. 110 NO. 5
accept students in order of priority up to capacity and reject the rest. In subsequent 
rounds, each student rejected in the previous step proposes to her ­most-preferred 
program among those that have not previously rejected her, and programs reject pro-
visionally accepted applicants in favor of new applicants with higher priority. This 
process iterates until all students are assigned to a program or all unassigned stu-
dents have been rejected by every program they have ranked. During our study time 
period, students left unassigned in the main round participate in a supplementary 
DA round in which they rank up to 12 additional programs with available seats. Any 
remaining students are administratively assigned by the district. About 82 percent, 8 
percent, and 10 percent of applicants are assigned in the main, supplementary, and 
administrative rounds, respectively (Abdulkadiroˇglu, Agarwal, and Pathak 2017).
An attractive theoretical property of the DA mechanism is that it is ­strategy-proof: 
since ­high-priority students can displace those with lower priority in later rounds of 
the process, listing schools in order of true preferences is a dominant strategy in the 
mechanism’s canonical version. This property, however, requires students to have 
the option to rank all schools (Haeringer and Klijn 2009, Pathak and Sönmez 2013). 
As we show below, more than 70 percent of students rank fewer than 12 programs, 
meaning that truthful ranking of schools is a dominant strategy for the majority of 
applicants. The instructions provided with the New York City high school applica-
tion also directly instruct students to rank schools in order of their true preferences 
(New York City Department of Education 2003). In the analysis to follow, we inter-
pret students’ ­rank-ordered lists as truthful reports of their preferences. We also 
probe the robustness of our findings to violations of this assumption by reporting 
results based on students who rank fewer than 12 choices.2
B. Data and Samples
The data used here are extracted from a DOE administrative information sys-
tem covering all students enrolled in New York City public schools between the 
­2003–2004 and ­2012–2013 school years (New York City Department of Education 
2013). These data include school enrollment, student demographics, home addresses, 
scores on New York Regents standardized tests, Preliminary SAT (PSAT) scores, 
and high school graduation records, along with preferences submitted to the cen-
tralized high school assignment mechanism. A supplemental file from the National 
Student Clearinghouse (NSC) reports college enrollment for students graduating 
from New York City high schools between 2009 and 2012. A unique student identi-
fier links records across these files.
We analyze high school applications and outcomes for four cohorts of students 
enrolled in New York City public schools in eighth grade between ­2003–2004 and 
­2006–2007. This set of students is used to construct several samples for statistical 
analysis. The choice sample, used to investigate preferences for schools, consists 
of all high school applicants with baseline (eighth grade) demographic, test score, 
and address information. Our analysis of school effectiveness uses subsamples 
of the choice sample corresponding to each outcome of interest. These outcome 
2 Along similar lines, Abdulkadiroˇglu, Agarwal, and Pathak (2017) shows that preference estimates using only 
the top-ranked school, the top three schools, and all but the last ranked school are similar.


--- PAGE 7 ---
1508
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
­samples include students with observed outcomes, baseline scores, demographics, 
and addresses, enrolled for ninth grade at one of 316 schools with at least 50 stu-
dents for each outcome. The outcome samples also exclude students enrolled at the 
nine selective high schools that do not admit students via the main DA mechanism. 
Online Appendix Section A and Appendix Table A1 provide further details on data 
sources and sample construction.
Key outcomes in our analysis include Regents math standardized test scores, 
PSAT scores, high school graduation, college attendance, and college quality. The 
high school graduation outcome equals 1 if a student graduates within five years of 
her projected high school entry date given her eighth grade cohort. Likewise, college 
attendance equals 1 for students who enroll in any college (two or four year) within 
two years of projected ­on-time high school graduation. The college quality variable, 
derived from Internal Revenue Service tax record statistics reported by Chetty et al. 
(2017), equals the mean 2014 income for children born between 1980 and 1982 
who attended a student’s college. The mean income for the ­non-college population 
is assigned to students who do not enroll in a college. While this metric does not 
distinguish between student quality and causal college effectiveness, it provides a 
measure of the selectivity of a student’s college. It has also been used elsewhere to 
assess effects of education programs on the intensive margin of college attendance 
(Chetty et al. 2011; Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff 2014b). College attendance and 
quality are unavailable for the ­2003–2004 cohort because the NSC data window 
does not allow us to determine whether students in this cohort were enrolled in col-
lege within two years of projected high school graduation.
Descriptive statistics for the choice and outcome samples appear in Table 1. These 
statistics show that New York City schools serve a disadvantaged urban population. 
­Seventy-three percent of students are black or Hispanic, and 65 percent are eligible 
for a subsidized lunch. Data from the ­2011–2015 American Community Surveys 
show that the average student in the choice sample lives in a census tract with a 
median household income of $50,136 in 2015 dollars. Observed characteristics are 
generally similar for students in the choice and outcome samples. The average PSAT 
score in New York City is 116, about 1 standard deviation below the US average (the 
PSAT is measured on a 240-point scale, normed to have a mean of 150 and a stan-
dard deviation of 30). The ­five-year high school graduation rate is 61 percent, and 48 
percent of students attend some college within two years of graduation.
C. Choice Lists
New York City high school applicants tend to prefer schools near their homes, 
and most do not fill their choice lists. These facts are shown in Table 2, which 
summarizes ­rank-ordered preference lists in the choice sample. As shown in col-
umn 1, 93 percent of applicants submit a second choice, about one-half submit 8 or 
more choices, and 28 percent submit the maximum 12 allowed choices. Column 2 
shows that students prefer schools located in their home boroughs: 85 percent of 
­first-choice schools are in the same borough as the student’s home address, and 
the fraction of other choices in the home borough are also high. Abdulkadiroˇglu, 
Agarwal, and Pathak (2017) reports that for ­2003–2004, 193 programs restricted 
eligibility to applicants who reside in the same borough. The preference analysis 


--- PAGE 8 ---
1509
ABDULKADIRO ˇGLU ET AL.: DO PARENTS VALUE SCHOOL EFFECTIVENESS?
VOL. 110 NO. 5
Table 1—Descriptive Statistics for New York City Eighth Graders
Outcome samples
Choice sample
Regents math
PSAT
HS graduation
College
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Female
0.497
0.518
0.532
0.500
0.500
Black
0.353
0.377
0.359
0.376
0.372
Hispanic
0.381
0.388
0.384
0.399
0.403
Subsidized lunch
0.654
0.674
0.667
0.680
0.700
Census tract median income
$50,136
$50,004
$49,993
$49,318
$49,243
Bronx
0.231
0.221
0.226
0.236
0.239
Brooklyn
0.327
0.317
0.335
0.339
0.333
Manhattan
0.118
0.118
0.119
0.116
0.116
Queens
0.259
0.281
0.255
0.250
0.253
Staten Island
0.065
0.063
0.064
0.059
0.059
Regents math score
0.000
−0.068
0.044
−0.068
−0.044
PSAT score
120
116
116
116
115
High school graduation
0.587
0.763
0.789
0.610
0.624
Attended college
0.463
0.588
0.616
0.478
0.478
College quality
$31,974
$33,934
$35,010
$31,454
$31,454
Observations
270,157
155,850
149,365
230,087
173,254
Notes: This table shows descriptive statistics for applicants to New York City public high schools between the 
2003–2004 and 2006–2007 school years. Column 1 reports average characteristics and outcomes for all applicants 
with complete information on preferences, demographics, and eighth-grade test scores. Columns 2–5 display char-
acteristics for the Regents math, PSAT, high school graduation, and college outcome samples. Outcome samples are 
restricted to students with data on the relevant outcome, enrolled in ninth grade at schools with at least 50 students 
for each outcome. Regents math scores are normalized to mean 0 and standard deviation 1 in the choice sample. 
High school graduation equals 1 for students who graduate from a New York City high school within five years of 
the end of their eighth grade year. College attendance equals 1 for students enrolled in any college within two years 
of projected high school graduation. College quality is the mean 2014 income for individuals in the 1980–1982 
birth cohorts who attended a student’s college. This variable equals the mean income in the non-college population 
for students who did not attend college. The college outcome sample excludes students in the 2003–2004 cohort. 
Census tract median income is median household income measured in 2015 dollars using data from the 2011–2015 
American Community Surveys. Regents math, PSAT, graduation, and college outcome statistics exclude students 
with missing values.
Table 2—Correlates of Preference Rankings for New York City High Schools
Fraction reporting
Same borough
Distance
Regents math score
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Choice 1
1.000
0.849
2.71
0.200
Choice 2
0.929
0.844
2.94
0.149
Choice 3
0.885
0.839
3.04
0.116
Choice 4
0.825
0.828
3.12
0.085
Choice 5
0.754
0.816
3.18
0.057
Choice 6
0.676
0.803
3.23
0.030
Choice 7
0.594
0.791
3.28
0.009
Choice 8
0.523
0.780
3.29
−0.013
Choice 9
0.458
0.775
3.31
−0.031
Choice 10
0.402
0.773
3.32
−0.051
Choice 11
0.345
0.774
3.26
−0.071
Choice 12
0.278
0.787
3.04
−0.107
Notes: This table reports average characteristics of New York City high schools by student pref-
erence rank. Column 1 displays fractions of student applications listing each choice. Column 2 
reports the fraction of listed schools located in the same borough as a student’s home address. 
Column 3 reports the mean distance between a student’s home address and each ranked school, 
measured in miles. This column excludes schools outside the home borough. Column 4 shows 
average Regents math scores in standard deviation units relative to the New York City average.


--- PAGE 9 ---
1510
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
to follow, therefore, treats schools in a student’s home borough as her choice set 
and aggregates schools in other boroughs into a single outside option. Column 3, 
which reports average distances (measured as ­great-circle distance in miles) for 
each choice restricted to schools in the home borough, shows that students rank 
nearby schools higher within boroughs as well.
Applicants also prefer schools with strong academic performance. The last col-
umn of Table 2 reports the average Regents high school math score for schools at 
each position on the rank list. Regents scores are normalized to have mean 0 and 
standard deviation 1 in the New York City population. To earn a high school diploma 
in New York state, students must pass a Regents math exam. These results reveal that 
­higher-ranked schools enroll students with better math scores. The average score at 
a ­first-choice school is 0.2 standard deviations (​σ​) above the city average, and aver-
age scores monotonically decline with rank. PSAT, graduation, college enrollment, 
and college quality indicators also decline with rank. Students and parents clearly 
prefer schools with high achievement levels. Our objective in the remainder of this 
paper is to decompose this pattern into components due to preferences for school 
effectiveness and peer quality.
II.  Conceptual Framework
Consider a population of students indexed by ​i​, each of whom attends one of  
​J​ schools. Let ​​Y​ij​​ denote the potential value of some outcome of interest for student  
​i​ if she attends school ​j​. The projection of ​​Y​ij​​ on a vector of observed characteris-
tics, ​​X​i​​, is written as
(1)	
​​Y​ij​  =  ​α​j​ + ​X​ i​ ′ ​ ​β​j​ + ​ϵ​ij​,​
where ​E​[​ϵ​ij​]​  =  E​[​X​i​ ​ϵ​ij​]​  =  0​ by definition of ​​α​j​​ and ​​β​j​​. The coefficient vector ​​β​j​​ 
measures the returns to observed student characteristics at school ​j​, while ​​ϵ​ij​​ reflects 
variation in potential outcomes unexplained by these characteristics. We further 
normalize ​E​[​X​i​]​  =  0​, so ​​α​j​  =  E​[​Y​ij​]​​ is the population mean potential outcome at 
school ​j​. The realized outcome for student ​i​ is ​​Y​i​  =  ​∑ j​   ​1​{​S​i​  =  j}​ ​Y​ij​​, where ​​S​i​  ∈ ​
{1, …, J}​​ denotes school attendance.
We decompose potential outcomes into components explained by student abil-
ity, school effectiveness, and idiosyncratic factors. Let ​​A​i​  =  ​(1/J)​∑ j​   ​Y​ij​​ denote 
student ​i​’s general ability, defined as the average of her potential outcomes across 
all schools. This variable describes how the student would perform at the average 
school. Adding and subtracting ​​A​i​​ on the ­right-hand side of (1) yields
(2)	
​​Y​ij​  =  ​α 
– ​ + ​X​ i​ ′ ​β 
– ​ + ​ϵ 
–​i​ 
 
​ 
​A​i​
​ 
​ + ​(​α​j​ − ​α 
– ​)​ 
⏟
​ 
AT​E​j​
​  ​ + ​X​ i​ ′ ​(​β​j​ − ​β 
– ​)​ + ​(​ϵ​ij​ − ​ϵ 
–​i​)​ 
 
​ 
 
​M​ij​
​ 
​,​
where ​α 
– ​  =  ​(1/J)​∑ j​   ​α​j​​, ​β 
– ​  =  ​(1/J)​∑ j​   ​β​j​​, and ​ϵ 
–​i​  =  ​(1/J)​∑ j​   ​ϵ​ij​​. Equation (2) shows 
that student ​i​’s potential outcome at school ​j​ is the sum of three terms: the student’s 
general ability, ​​A​i​​; the school’s average treatment effect, ​AT​E​j​​, defined as the causal 
effect of school ​j​ relative to an average school for an average student; and a match 
effect, ​​M​ij​​, which reflects student ​i​’s idiosyncratic suitability for school ​j​. Match 


--- PAGE 10 ---
1511
ABDULKADIRO ˇGLU ET AL.: DO PARENTS VALUE SCHOOL EFFECTIVENESS?
VOL. 110 NO. 5
effects may arise either because of an interaction between student ​i​’s observed 
characteristics and the extra returns to characteristics at school ​j​ (captured by 
​X​ i​ ′ ​(​β​j​ − ​β 
– ​)​​) or because of unobserved factors that make student ​i​ more or less suit-
able for school ​j​ (captured by ​​ϵ​ij​ − ​ ϵ 
– ​i​​).
This decomposition allows us to interpret variation in observed outcomes across 
schools using three terms. The average outcome at school ​j​ is given by
(3)	
​E​[​Y​i​ | ​S​i​  =  j]​  =  ​Q​j ​ + AT​E​j​ + E​[​M​ij​ | ​S​i​  =  j]​.​
Here ​​Q​j​  =  E​[​A​i​ | ​S​i​  =  j]​​ is the average ability of students enrolled at school ​j​, a 
variable we label “peer quality.” The quantity ​E​[​M​ij​ | ​S​i​  =  j]​​ is the average suitabil-
ity of ​j​’s students for this particular school. In a Roy (1951)-style model in which 
students sort into schools on the basis of comparative advantage in the production 
of ​​Y​i​​, we would expect these average match effects to be positive. Parents and stu-
dents may also choose schools on the basis of peer quality ​​Q​j​​, overall school effec-
tiveness ​AT​E​j​​, or the idiosyncratic match ​​M​ij​​ for various outcomes.
III.  Empirical Methods
The goal of our empirical analysis is to assess the roles of peer quality, school 
effectiveness, and academic match quality in applicant preferences. Our analysis 
proceeds in three steps. We first use ­rank-ordered choice lists to estimate prefer-
ences, thereby generating measures of each school’s popularity. Next, we estimate 
schools’ causal effects on test scores, high school graduation, college attendance, 
and college choice. Finally, we combine these two sets of estimates to characterize 
the relationships among school popularity, peer quality, and causal effectiveness.
A. Estimating Preferences
Let ​​U​ij​​ denote student ​i​’s utility from enrolling in school ​j​, and let ​  =  ​{1, …, J}​​ 
represent the set of available schools. We abstract from the fact that students rank 
programs rather than schools by ignoring repeat occurrences of any individual 
school on a student’s choice list. Therefore, ​​U​ij​​ may be interpreted as the indirect 
utility associated with student ​i​’s favorite program at school ​j​. The school ranked 
first on a student’s choice list is
	
​​R​i1​  =  ​arg max​ 
j∈​  ​ ​U​ij​​,
while subsequent ranks satisfy
	
​​R​ik​  =  ​  arg max​ 
j∈ \​{​R​im​:m<k}​
​U​ij​,  k  >  1​.
Student ​i​’s ­rank-order list is then ​​R​i​  =  ​(​R​i1​, …, ​R​iℓ​(i)​​)​​′, where ​ℓ​(i)​​ is the length of 
the list submitted by this student.


--- PAGE 11 ---
1512
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
We summarize these preference lists by fitting random utility models with param-
eters that vary according to observed student characteristics. Student ​i​’s utility from 
enrolling in school ​j​ is modeled as
(4)	
​​U​ij​  =  ​δ​c​(​X​i​)​j​ − ​τ​c​(​X​i​)​​ ​D​ij​ + ​η​ij​,​
where the function ​c​(​X​i​)​​ assigns students to covariate cells based on the variables in 
the vector ​​X​i​​, and ​​D​ij​​ records distance from student ​i​’s home address to school ​j​. The 
parameter ​​δ​cj​​ is the mean utility of school ​j​ for students in covariate cell ​c​, and ​​τ​c​​ 
is a ­cell-specific distance parameter or “cost.” We include distance in the model 
because a large body of evidence suggests it plays a central role in school choices 
(e.g., Hastings, Kane, and Staiger 2009 and Abdulkadiroˇglu et al. 2017). We model 
unobserved tastes ​​η​ij​​ as following independent extreme value type I distributions 
conditional on ​​X​i​​ and ​​D​i​  =  ​(​D​i1​, …, ​D​iJ​)​​′. Equation (4) is therefore a ­rank-ordered 
multinomial logit model (Hausman and Ruud 1987).
The logit model implies the conditional likelihood of the rank list ​​R​i​​ is
	
​​(​R​i​ | ​X​i​, ​D​i​)​  =  ​ ∏ 
k=1​ 
ℓ​(i)​
 ​ 
exp​(​δ​c​(​X​i​)​R​ik​​ − ​τ​c​(​X​i​)​​ ​D​i​R​ik​​)​ 
 
 
_________________________ 
 
 
 
​∑ j∈ \​{​R​im​:m<k}​​ 
  
​exp​(​δ​c​(​X​i​)​j​ − ​τ​c​(​X​i​)​​ ​D​ij​)​ ​​.
We allow flexible heterogeneity in tastes by estimating preference models sep-
arately for 360 covariate cells defined by the intersection of borough, sex, ­ 
race/ethnicity (black, Hispanic, or other), subsidized lunch status, ­above-median cen-
sus tract income, and terciles of the mean of eighth grade math and reading scores. 
This specification follows several recent studies that flexibly parametrize preference 
heterogeneity in terms of observable characteristics (e.g., Hastings, Hortaçsu, and 
Syverson 2017 and Langer 2016). Students rarely rank schools outside their home bor-
oughs, so covariate cells often include zero students ranking any given ­out-of-borough 
school. We therefore restrict the choice set ​​ to schools located in the home borough 
and aggregate all other schools into an outside option with utility normalized to zero. 
Maximum likelihood estimation of the preference parameters produces a list of school 
mean utilities along with a distance coefficient for each covariate cell.
B. Estimating School Effectiveness
Our analysis of school effectiveness aims to recover the parameters of the poten-
tial outcome equations defined in Section II. We take two approaches to estimating 
these parameters.
Approach 1: Selection on observables.
The first set of estimates is based on the assumption
(5)	
​E​[​Y​ij​ | ​X​i​, ​S​i​]​  =  ​α​j​ + ​X​ i​ ′ ​ ​β​j​,  j  =  1, …, J.​
This restriction, often labeled “selection on observables,” requires school enroll-
ment to be as good as random conditional on the covariate vector ​​X​i​​, which includes 


--- PAGE 12 ---
1513
ABDULKADIRO ˇGLU ET AL.: DO PARENTS VALUE SCHOOL EFFECTIVENESS?
VOL. 110 NO. 5
sex, race, subsidized lunch status, the log of median census tract income, and eighth 
grade math and reading scores. Assumption (5) implies that an ordinary least 
squares (OLS) regression of ​​Y​i​​ on school indicators interacted with ​​X​i​​ recovers 
unbiased estimates of ​​α​j​​ and ​​β​j​​ for each school. This fully interacted specification 
is a ­multiple-treatment extension of the ­Oaxaca-Blinder (1973) treatment effects 
estimator (Kline 2011).3 By allowing school effectiveness to vary with student char-
acteristics, we generalize the constant effects “­value-added” approach commonly 
used to estimate the contributions of teachers and schools to student achievement 
(Koedel, Mihaly, and Rockoff 2015).
The credibility of the selection on observables assumption underlying ­value-added 
estimators is a matter of continuing debate (Rothstein 2010, 2017; Kane et al. 2013; 
­Bacher-Hicks, Kane, and Staiger 2014; Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff 2014a, 2016, 
2017; Guarino, Reckase, and Wooldridge 2015). Comparisons to results from admis-
sion lotteries indicate that school ­value-added models accurately predict the impacts 
of random assignment but are not perfectly unbiased (Deming 2014; Angrist et al. 
2016b, 2017). Selection on observables may also be more plausible for test scores 
than for ­longer-run outcomes, for which lagged measures of the dependent variable 
are not available (Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff 2014a). We therefore report OLS 
estimates as a benchmark and compare these to estimates from a more general strat-
egy that relaxes assumption (5).
Approach 2: ­Rank-ordered control functions.
Our second approach is motivated by the restriction 
(6) ​E​[​Y​ij​ | ​X​i​, ​D​i​, ​η​i1​, …, ​η​iJ​, ​S​i​]​  =  ​α​j​ + ​X​ i​ ′ ​ ​β​j​ + ​g​j​(​D​i​, ​η​i1​, …, ​η​iJ​)​,  j  =  1, …, J.​
This restriction implies that any omitted variable bias afflicting OLS ­value-added 
estimates is due either to spatial heterogeneity captured by distances to each school 
(​​D​i​​) or to the preferences underlying the ­rank-ordered lists submitted to the assign-
ment mechanism (​​η​ij​​). The function ​​g​j​( · )​​ allows potential outcomes to vary arbi-
trarily across students with different preferences over schools. Factors that lead 
students with the same observed characteristics, spatial locations, and preferences 
to ultimately enroll in different schools, such as school priorities, random rationing 
due to oversubscription, or noncompliance with the assignment mechanism, are pre-
sumed to be unrelated to potential outcomes.
Under assumption (6), comparisons of matched sets of students with the same 
covariates, values of distance, and ­rank-ordered choice lists recover causal effects 
of school attendance. This model is therefore similar to the “­self-revelation” model 
proposed by Dale and Krueger (2002, 2014) in the context of postsecondary enroll-
ment. Dale and Krueger assume that students reveal their unobserved “types” via the 
selectivity of their college application portfolios, so college enrollment is as good as 
random among students who apply to the same schools. Similarly, (6) implies that 
3 We also include main effects of borough so that the model includes the same variables used to define covariate 
cells in the preference model.


--- PAGE 13 ---
1514
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
high school applicants reveal their types through the content of their ­rank-ordered 
preference lists.
Though intuitively appealing, full nonparametric matching on ­rank-ordered lists 
is not feasible in practice because few students share the exact same rankings. We 
therefore use the structure of the logit choice model in equation (4) to derive a para-
metric approximation to this matching procedure. Specifically, we replace equation 
(6) with the assumption
(7)  ​E​[​Y​ij​ | ​X​i​, ​D​i​, ​η​i1​, …, ​η​iJ​, ​S​i​]​ 

=  ​α​j​ + ​X​ i​ ′ ​ ​β​j​ + ​D​ i​ ′ ​ γ + ​ ∑ 
k=1
​ 
J
  ​ψ​k​ × ​(​η​ik​ − ​μ​η​)​ + φ × ​(​η​ij​ − ​μ​η​)​,  j  =  1, …, J,​
where ​​μ​η​  =  E​[​η​ij​]​​ is Euler’s constant.4 As in the multinomial logit selection model 
of Dubin and McFadden (1984), equation (7) imposes a linear relationship between 
potential outcomes and the unobserved logit errors. Functional form assumptions of 
this sort are common in multinomial selection models with many alternatives, where 
requirements for nonparametric identification are very stringent (Lee 1983; Dahl 
2002; Heckman, Urzua, and Vytlacil 2008).5
Equation (7) accommodates a variety of forms of selection on unobservables. 
The coefficient ​​ψ​k​​ represents an effect of the preference for school ​k​ common to 
all potential outcomes. This permits students with strong preferences for particu-
lar schools to have higher or lower general ability ​​A​i​​. The parameter ​φ​ captures 
an additional match effect of the preference for school ​j​ on the potential outcome 
at this specific school. The model therefore allows for “essential” heterogeneity 
linking preferences to unobserved match effects in student outcomes (Heckman, 
Urzua, and Vytlacil 2006). A Roy (1951)-style model of selection on gains would 
imply ​φ  >  0​, but we do not impose this restriction.
By iterated expectations, equation (7) implies that mean observed outcomes at 
school ​j​ are
(8)      ​E​[​Y​i​ | ​X​i​, ​D​i​, ​R​i​, ​S​i​  =  j]​ 
	
    =  ​α​j​ + ​X​ i​ ′ ​ ​β​j​ + ​D​ i​ ′ ​ γ + ​ ∑ 
k=1
​ 
J
  ​ψ​k​ ​λ​k​(​X​i​, ​D​i​, ​R​i​)​ + φ​λ​j​(​X​i​, ​D​i​, ​R​i​)​,​
where ​​λ​k​(​X​i​, ​D​i​, ​R​i​)​  =  E​[​η​ik​ − ​μ​η​ | ​X​i​, ​D​i​, ​R​i​]​​ gives the mean preference for school  
​k​ conditional on a student’s characteristics, spatial location, and preference list. The ​​λ​k​
( · )​​s serve as “control functions” correcting for selection on unobservables (Heckman 
and Robb 1985, Blundell and Matzkin 2014, Wooldridge 2015). As shown in online 
Appendix Section B.1, these functions are generalizations of the formulas derived by 
Dubin and McFadden (1984), extended to account for the fact that we observe a list 
of several ranked alternatives rather than just the most preferred choice.
Note that equation (8) includes main effects of distance to each school; we do not 
impose an exclusion restriction for distance. Identification of the selection parame-
ters ​​ψ​k​​ and ​φ​ comes from variation in preference rankings for students who enroll at 
4 The means of both ​​X​i​​ and ​​D​i​​ are normalized to zero to maintain the interpretation that ​​α​j​  =  E​[​Y​ij​]​​.
5 As discussed in Section V, we also estimate an alternative model that includes fixed effects for first choice schools.


--- PAGE 14 ---
1515
ABDULKADIRO ˇGLU ET AL.: DO PARENTS VALUE SCHOOL EFFECTIVENESS?
VOL. 110 NO. 5
the same school conditional on covariates and distance. Intuitively, if students who 
rank school ​j​ highly do better than expected given their observed characteristics at 
all schools, we will infer that ​​ψ​j​  >  0​. If these students do better than expected at 
school ​j​ but not elsewhere, we will infer that ​φ  >  0​.
We use the choice model parameters to build ­first-step estimates of the con-
trol functions, then estimate equation (8) in a ­second-step OLS regression of ​​Y​i​​ 
on school indicators and their interactions with ​​X​i​​, controlling for ​​D​i​​ and the esti-
mated ​​λ​k​( · )​​ functions.6 We adjust inference for estimation error in the control func-
tions via a ­two-step extension of the score bootstrap procedure of Kline and Santos 
(2012). As detailed in online Appendix Section B.2, the score bootstrap avoids the 
need to recalculate the ­first-step logit estimates or the inverse variance matrix of the 
­second-step regressors in the bootstrap iterations.
The Joint Distribution of Peer Quality and School Effectiveness.—Estimates of 
equations (5) and (7) may be used to calculate each school’s peer quality. A stu-
dent’s predicted ability in the ­value-added model is
(9)	
​​A ˆ ​i​  =  ​ 1 
_ 
J ​ ​ ∑ 
j=1
​ 
J
 ​[​α ˆ ​j​ + ​X​ i​ ′ ​ ​β ˆ ​j​]​,​
where ​​α ˆ ​j​​ and ​​β ˆ ​j​​ are OLS ­value-added coefficients. Predicted ability in the control 
function model adds estimates of the distance and control function terms in equation 
(8). Estimated peer quality at school ​j​ is then ​​Q ˆ ​j​  =  ​∑ i​   ​ 1​{​S​i​  =  j}​ ​A ˆ ​i​/​∑ i​   ​ 1​{​S​i​  =  j}​​, 
the average predicted ability of enrolled students.
The end result of our school quality estimation procedure is a vector of estimates 
for each school, ​​θ ˆ ​j​  =  ​(​α ˆ ​j​, ​β ˆ ​ j​ ′ ​, ​Q ˆ ​j​)​​′. The vector of parameters for the control function 
model also includes an estimate of the selection coefficient for school ​j​, ​​ψ ˆ ​j​​. These 
estimates are unbiased but noisy measures of the underlying ­school-specific param-
eters ​​θ​j​​. We investigate the distribution of ​​θ​j​​ using the following hierarchical model:
(10)	
​​θ ˆ ​j​ | ​θ​j​  ∼  N​(​θ​j​, ​Ω​j​)​,​
	
​​θ​j​  ∼  N​(​μ​θ​, ​Σ​θ​)​.​
Here ​​Ω​j​​ is the sampling variance of the estimator ​​θ ˆ ​j​​, while ​​μ​θ​​ and ​​Σ​θ​​ govern the dis-
tribution of latent parameters across schools. In a hierarchical Bayesian framework  
​​μ​θ​​ and ​​Σ​θ​​ are hyperparameters describing a prior distribution for ​​θ​j​​. We estimate 
these hyperparameters by maximum likelihood applied to model (10), approximat-
ing ​​Ω​j​​ with an estimate of the asymptotic variance of ​​θ ˆ ​j​​.7 The resulting estimates 
of ​​μ​θ​​ and ​​Σ​θ​​ characterize the joint distribution of peer quality and school treatment 
effect parameters, purged of the estimation error in ​​θ ˆ ​j​​.
6 The choice model uses only preferences over schools in students’ home boroughs, so ​​λ​k​( · )​​ is undefined for 
students outside school ​k​’s borough. We therefore include dummies for missing values and code the control func-
tions to 0 for these students. We similarly code ​​D​ik​​ to 0 for students outside of school ​k​’s borough and include bor-
ough indicators so that the distance coefficients are estimated using only ­within-borough variation. Our key results 
are not sensitive to dropping students attending ­out-of-borough schools from the sample.
7 The peer quality estimates ​​Q ˆ ​j​​ are typically very precise, so we treat peer quality as known rather than estimated 
when fitting the hierarchical model. 


--- PAGE 15 ---
1516
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
This hierarchical model can also be used to improve estimates of parameters for 
individual schools. An empirical Bayes (EB) posterior mean for ​​θ​j​​ is given by
	
​​θ​ j​ ∗​  =  ​(​Ω ˆ ​ j​ −1​ + ​Σ ˆ ​ θ​ 
−1​)​​ 
−1​(​​Ω ˆ ​ j​ −1​ ​θ ˆ ​j​ + ​Σ ˆ ​ θ​ 
−1​ ​μ ˆ ​θ​)​​,
where ​​Ω ˆ ​j​​, ​​μ ˆ ​θ​​, and ​​Σ 
ˆ ​θ​​ are estimates of ​​Ω​j​​, ​​μ​θ​​, and ​​Σ​θ​​. Relative to the unbiased but 
noisy estimate ​​θ ˆ ​j​​, this EB shrinkage estimator uses the prior distribution to reduce 
sampling variance at the cost of increased bias, yielding a minimum mean squared 
error (MSE) prediction of ​​θ​j​​ (Robbins 1956, Morris 1983). This approach paral-
lels recent work applying shrinkage methods to estimate causal effects of teachers, 
schools, neighborhoods, and hospitals (Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff 2014a; Hull 
2016; Angrist et al. 2017; Chetty and Hendren 2017; Finkelstein et al. 2017). Online 
Appendix Section B.3 further describes our EB estimation strategy. In addition to 
reducing MSE, empirical Bayes shrinkage eliminates attenuation bias that would 
arise in models using elements of ​​θ ˆ ​j​​ as regressors (Jacob and Lefgren 2008). We 
exploit this property by regressing estimates of school popularity on EB posterior 
means in the final step of our empirical analysis.
C. Linking Preferences to School Effectiveness
We relate preferences to peer quality and causal effects with regressions of the 
form
(11)	
​​δ ˆ ​cj​  =  ​κ​c​ + ​ρ​1​ ​Q​ j​ ∗​ + ​ρ​2​ AT​E​ j​ ∗​ + ​ρ​3​ ​M​ cj​ 
∗ ​ + ​ξ​cj​,​
where ​​δ ˆ ​cj​​ is an estimate of the mean utility of school ​j​ for students in covariate 
cell ​c​, ​​κ​c​​ is a cell fixed effect, and ​​Q​ j​ ∗​​ and ​AT​E​ j​ ∗​​ are EB posterior mean predictions 
of peer quality and average treatment effects. The variable ​​M​ cj​ 
∗ ​​ is an EB prediction 
of the mean match effect of school ​j​ for students in cell ​c​. Observations in equa-
tion (11) are weighted by the inverse sampling variance of ​​δ ˆ ​cj​​. We use the vari-
ance estimator proposed by Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2011) to ­double-cluster 
inference by cell and school. ­Two-way clustering accounts for correlated estimation 
errors in ​​δ ˆ ​cj​​ across schools within a cell as well as unobserved determinants of pop-
ularity common to a given school across cells. We estimate equation (11) separately 
for Regents test scores, PSAT scores, high school graduation, college attendance, 
and college quality. The parameters ​​ρ​1​​, ​​ρ​2​​, and ​​ρ​3​​ measure how preferences relate to 
peer quality, school effectiveness, and match quality.8
8 The control function version of our estimation procedure is closely related to classic ­selection-correction 
methods from studies of labor supply decisions. In their review of identification of labor supply models, French 
and Taber (2011) details a procedure that estimates labor market participation probabilities in a first step, uses these 
probabilities to ­selection-correct a wage equation in a second step, then relates participation to the unselected wage 
equation parameters in a third “structural probit” step. Similarly, we use preference estimates to ­selection-correct 
equations for student outcomes, then link the ­selection-corrected outcome estimates back to preferences to under-
stand relationships between choices and treatment effects.


--- PAGE 16 ---
1517
ABDULKADIRO ˇGLU ET AL.: DO PARENTS VALUE SCHOOL EFFECTIVENESS?
VOL. 110 NO. 5
IV.  Parameter Estimates
A. Preference Parameters
Table 3 summarizes the distribution of household preference parameters across 
the 316 high schools and 360 covariate cells in the choice sample. The first row 
reports estimated standard deviations of the mean utility ​​δ​cj​​ across schools and cells, 
while the second row displays the mean and standard deviation of the ­cell-specific 
distance cost ​​τ​c​​. School mean utilities are deviations from cell averages to account 
for differences in the reference category across boroughs, and calculations are 
weighted by cell size. We adjust these standard deviations for sampling error in the 
estimated preference parameters by subtracting the average squared standard error 
from the sample variance of mean utilities.
Consistent with the descriptive statistics in Table 1, the preference estimates indi-
cate that households dislike more distant schools. The mean distance cost is 0.33. This 
implies that increasing the distance to a particular school by one mile reduces the odds 
that a household prefers this school to another in the same borough by 33 percent. 
The standard deviation of the distance cost across covariate cells is 0.12. While there 
is significant heterogeneity in distastes for distance, all of the estimated distance costs 
are positive, suggesting that all subgroups prefer schools closer to home.
The estimates in Table 3 reveal significant heterogeneity in tastes for schools both 
within and between subgroups. The ­within-cell standard deviation of school mean 
utilities, which measures the variation in ​​δ​cj​​ across schools ​j​ for a fixed cell ​c​, equals 
1.12. This is equivalent to roughly 3.4 (1.12/0.33) miles of distance, implying that 
households are willing to travel substantial distances to attend more popular schools. 
The ­between-cell standard deviation, which measures variation in ​​δ​cj​​ across ​c​ for a 
Table 3—Variation in Student Preference Parameters
Standard deviations
Mean
Within cells
Between cells
Total
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
School mean utility
—
1.117
0.500
1.223
(0.045)
(0.003)
(0.018)
Distance cost
0.330
—
0.120
0.120
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.005)
Number of students
270,157
Number of schools
316
Number of covariate cells
360
Notes: This table summarizes variation in school value-added and utility parameters across 
schools and covariate cells. Utility estimates come from rank-ordered logit models fit to stu-
dent preference rankings. These models include school indicators and distance to school and 
are estimated separately in covariate cells defined by borough, gender, race, subsidized lunch 
status, an indicator for above or below the median of census tract median income, and tercile 
of the average of eighth grade math and reading scores. Column 1 shows the mean of the dis-
tance coefficient across cells weighted by cell size. Column 2 shows the standard deviation of 
school mean utilities across schools within a cell, and column 3 shows the standard deviation 
of a given school’s mean utility across cells. School mean utilities are deviated from cell aver-
ages to account for differences in the reference category across cells. Estimated standard devi-
ations are adjusted for sampling error by subtracting the average squared standard error of the 
parameter estimates from the total variance.


--- PAGE 17 ---
1518
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
fixed ​j​, is 0.50, equivalent to about 1.5 (0.5/0.33) miles of distance. The larger 
­within-cell standard deviation indicates that students in different subgroups tend to 
prefer the same schools.
B. School Effectiveness and Peer Quality
Our estimates of school treatment effects imply substantial variation in both 
causal effects and sorting across schools. Table 4 reports estimated means and 
standard deviations of peer quality ​​Q​j​​, average treatment effects ​AT​E​j​​, and slope 
coefficients ​​β​j​​. We normalize the means of ​​Q​j​​ and ​AT​E​j​​ to 0 and quantify the vari-
ation in these parameters relative to the average school. As shown in column 2, 
the ­value-added model produces standard deviations of ​​Q​j​​ and ​AT​E​j​​ for Regents 
math scores equal to ​0.29σ​. This is somewhat larger than corresponding estimates 
of variation in school ­value-added from previous studies (usually around ​0.15–0.2σ​; 
see, e.g., Angrist et al. 2017). One possible reason for this difference is that most 
Table 4—Distributions of Peer Quality and Treatment Effect Parameters for Regents Math Scores
Value-added model
Control function model
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Peer quality
0
0.288
0
0.305
—
(0.012)
—
(0.012)
ATE
0
0.290
0
0.233
—
(0.012)
—
(0.014)
Female
−0.048
0.062
−0.029
0.062
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.006)
Black
−0.112
0.130
−0.108
0.120
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.011)
Hispanic
−0.097
0.114
−0.085
0.105
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.012)
Subsidized lunch
0.001
0.052
0.026
0.054
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.006)
log census tract median income
0.020
0.037
0.013
0.045
(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.005)
(0.006)
Eighth grade math score
0.622
0.105
0.599
0.105
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.006)
Eighth grade reading score
0.159
0.048
0.143
0.052
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
Preference coefficient (​ψ​j​)
—
—
−0.001
0.007
(0.001)
(0.000)
Match coefficient (φ)
—
—
0.006
—
(0.001)
Notes: This table reports estimated means and standard deviations of peer quality and school treatment effect 
parameters for Regents math scores. Peer quality is a school’s average predicted test score given the characteristics 
of its students. The ATE is a school’s average treatment effect, and other treatment effect parameters are school-spe-
cific interactions with student characteristics. Estimates come from maximum likelihood models fit to school-spe-
cific regression coefficients. Columns 1 and 2 report estimates from an OLS regression that includes interactions 
of school indicators with sex, race, subsidized lunch, the log of the median income in a student’s census tract, and 
eighth grade reading and math scores. This model also includes main effects of borough. Columns 3 and 4 show 
estimates from a control function model that adds distance to each school and predicted unobserved preferences 
from the choice model. Control functions and distance variables are set to 0 for out-of-borough schools and indica-
tors for missing values are included.


--- PAGE 18 ---
1519
ABDULKADIRO ˇGLU ET AL.: DO PARENTS VALUE SCHOOL EFFECTIVENESS?
VOL. 110 NO. 5
students in our sample attend high school for two years before taking Regents math 
exams, while previous studies look at impacts after one year.
As shown in columns 3 and 4 of Table 4, the control function model attributes 
some of the variation in Regents math ­value-added parameters to selection bias. 
Adding controls for unobserved preferences and distance increases the estimated 
standard deviation of ​​Q​j​​ to ​0.31σ​ and reduces the estimated standard deviation 
of ​AT​E​j​​ to ​0.23σ​. Figure 1, which compares ­value-added and control function esti-
mates for all five outcomes, demonstrates that this pattern holds for other outcomes 
as well: adjusting for selection on unobservables compresses the estimated distri-
butions of treatment effects. This compression is more severe for high school grad-
uation, college attendance, and college quality than for Regents math and PSAT 
scores. Our findings are therefore consistent with previous evidence that bias in OLS 
­value-added models is more important for ­longer-run and ­non-test score outcomes 
(see, e.g., Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff 2014b).
The bottom rows of Table 4 show evidence of substantial treatment effect hetero-
geneity across students. For example, the standard deviation of the slope coefficient 
on a black indicator equals ​0.12σ​ in the control function model. This implies that 
holding the average treatment effect ​AT​E​j​​ fixed, a one standard deviation improve-
ment in a school’s match quality for black students boosts scores for these students 
by about a tenth of a standard deviation relative to whites. We also find signifi-
cant variation in slope coefficients for gender (​0.06σ​), Hispanic (​0.11σ​), subsidized 
lunch status (​0.05σ​), the log of median census tract income (​0.05σ​), and eighth 
grade math and reading scores (​0.11σ​ and ​0.05σ​). The final row of column 3 reports 
a control function estimate of ​φ​, the parameter capturing matching between unob-
served preferences and Regents scores. This estimate indicates a positive relation-
ship between preferences and the unobserved component of ­student-specific test 
score gains, but the magnitude of the coefficient is very small.9
Our estimates imply that ­high-ability students tend to enroll in more effec-
tive schools. Table 5 reports correlations between ​​Q​j​​ and key school treatment 
effect parameters based on control function estimates for Regents math scores. 
Corresponding ­value-added estimates appear in online Appendix Table  A2. The 
estimated correlation between peer quality and average treatment effects is 0.59. 
This may reflect either positive peer effects or ­higher-achieving students’ tendency 
to enroll in schools with better inputs. Our finding that schools with ­high-ability 
peers are more effective contrasts with recent studies of exam schools in New York 
City and Boston, which show limited treatment effects for highly selective pub-
lic schools (Abdulkadiroˇglu, Angrist, and Pathak 2014; Dobbie and Fryer 2014). 
Within the broader New York public high school system, we find a strong positive 
association between school effectiveness and average student ability.
Table 5 also reports estimated correlations of ​​Q​j​​ and ​AT​E​j​​ with the slope coeffi-
cients ​​β​j​​. Schools with larger average treatment effects tend to be especially good 
for girls: the correlation between ​AT​E​j​​ and the female slope coefficient is positive 
and statistically significant. This is consistent with evidence from Deming et al. 
9 The average predicted value of ​​(​η​ij​ − ​μ​η​)​​ for a student’s enrolled school in our sample is 2.0. Our estimate 
of ​φ​ therefore implies that unobserved match effects increase average test scores by about 1 percent of a standard 
deviation (​0.006σ × 2.0  =  0.012σ)​.


--- PAGE 19 ---
1520
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
(2014) showing that girls’ outcomes are more responsive to school ­value-added. We 
estimate a very high positive correlation between black and Hispanic coefficients, 
suggesting that match effects tend to be similar for these two groups.
The slope coefficient on eighth grade reading scores is negatively correlated with 
peer quality and the average treatment effect. Both of these estimated correlations 
are below −0.4 and statistically significant. In other words, schools that enroll 
­higher-ability students and produce larger achievement gains are especially effec-
tive at teaching ­low-achievers. In contrast to our estimate of the parameter ​φ​, this 
suggests negative selection on the observed component of match effects in ­student 
achievement. A similar selection pattern is documented by Walters (2018), which 
Panel A. Regents math scores
Panel B. PSAT scores
Panel D. College attendance
Panel E. log college quality
−1
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
−0.2
−0.5
0
0.5
1
Control function estimate
−0.5
−1
0
0.5
1
Value-added estimate
Value-added estimate
Value-added estimate
Value-added estimate
−10
0
10
20
30
Control function estimate
−10
0
10
20
30
Control function estimate
0
0.1
−0.1
−0.2
0.2
0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Control function estimate
0
0.1
−0.1
−0.2
0.2
0.3
Panel C. High school graduation
Value-added estimate
Control function estimate
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
−0.3
0
0.1
0.2
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Figure 1. Comparison of Value-Added and Control Function Estimates  
of School Average Treatment Effects
Notes: This figure plots school average treatment effect (ATE) estimates from value-added models against corre-
sponding estimates from models including control functions that adjust for selection on unobservables. Value-added 
estimates come from regressions of outcomes on school indicators interacted with gender, race, subsidized lunch 
status, the log of census tract median income, and eighth grade math and reading scores. Control function mod-
els add distance to school and predicted unobserved tastes from the choice model. Points in the figure are empiri-
cal Bayes posterior means from models fit to the distribution of school-specific estimates. Dashed lines show the 
45-degree line.


--- PAGE 20 ---
1521
ABDULKADIRO ˇGLU ET AL.: DO PARENTS VALUE SCHOOL EFFECTIVENESS?
VOL. 110 NO. 5
shows that ­lower-scoring students in Boston are less likely to apply to charter schools 
despite receiving larger achievement benefits. Section V presents a more systematic 
investigation of relationships between preferences and match effects.
Patterns of estimates for PSAT scores, high school graduation, college atten-
dance, and college quality are generally similar to results for Regents math scores. 
Online Appendix Tables ­A3–A6 present estimated distributions of peer quality and 
school effectiveness for these ­longer-run outcomes. For all five outcomes, we find 
substantial variation in peer quality and average treatment effects, a strong positive 
correlation between these variables, and significant effect heterogeneity with respect 
to student characteristics. Overall, causal effects for the ­longer-run outcomes are 
highly correlated with effects on Regents math scores. This is evident in Figure 2, 
which plots EB posterior mean predictions of average treatment effects on Regents 
scores against corresponding predictions for the other four outcomes. These results 
are consistent with recent evidence that ­short-run test score impacts reliably pre-
dict effects on ­longer-run outcomes (Chetty et  al. 2011; Dynarski, Hyman, and 
Schanzenbach 2013; Angrist et al. 2016a).
C. Decomposition of School Average Outcomes
We summarize the joint distribution of peer quality and school effectiveness by 
implementing the decomposition introduced in Section II. Table 6 uses the control 
function estimates to decompose variation in school averages for each outcome into 
Table 5—Correlations of Peer Quality and Treatment Effect Parameters for Regents Math Scores
Control function parameters
Peer
quality
ATE
Female
Black
Hispanic
Sub.  
lunch
Math 
score
Reading 
score
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
ATE
0.588
(0.052)
Female
0.078
0.299
(0.078)
(0.101)
Black
0.006
0.107
−0.177
(0.077)
(0.106)
(0.142)
Hispanic
−0.013
0.115
−0.235
0.922
(0.080)
(0.112)
(0.150)
(0.028)
Subsidized lunch
0.045
−0.168
0.066
−0.038
0.004
(0.086)
(0.117)
(0.140)
(0.153)
(0.159)
Eighth grade math score
−0.075
0.037
−0.074
−0.005
−0.007
0.060
(0.064)
(0.083)
(0.099)
(0.102)
(0.109)
(0.113)
Eighth grade reading score −0.418
−0.452
−0.193
−0.090
−0.078
0.004
0.256
(0.068)
(0.094)
(0.117)
(0.130)
(0.138)
(0.135)
(0.099)
Preference coefficient (​ψ​j​)
0.429
0.247
0.212
−0.083
−0.058
−0.127
−0.241
−0.281
(0.063)
(0.092)
(0.104)
(0.106)
(0.111)
(0.116)
(0.083)
(0.099)
Notes: This table reports estimated correlations between peer quality and school treatment effect parameters for 
Regents math scores. The ATE is a school’s average treatment effect, and other treatment effect parameters are 
school-specific interactions with student characteristics. Estimates come from maximum likelihood models fit to 
school-specific regression coefficients from a control function model controlling for observed characteristics, dis-
tance to school, and unobserved tastes from the choice model.


--- PAGE 21 ---
1522
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
components explained by peer quality, school effectiveness, average match effects, 
and covariances of these components.
Consistent with the estimates in Table 4, both peer quality and school effective-
ness play roles in generating variation in school average outcomes, but peer quality 
is generally more important. Peer quality explains 47 percent of the variance in 
average Regents scores (0.093/0.191), while average treatment effects explain 28 
percent (0.054/0.191). The explanatory power of peer quality for other outcomes 
ranges from 49 percent (PSAT scores) to 83 percent (high school graduation), while 
the importance of average treatment effects ranges from 10 percent (PSAT scores) 
to 19 percent (log college quality).
Despite the significant variation in slope coefficients documented in Table 4, match 
effects are unimportant in explaining dispersion in school average outcomes. The vari-
ance of match effects accounts for only 5 percent of the variation in average Regents 
scores, and corresponding estimates for the other outcomes are also small. Although 
school treatment effects vary substantially across subgroups, there is not much sorting 
of students to schools on this basis, so the existence of potential match effects is of 
little consequence for realized variation in outcomes across schools.
Panel A. Regents math scores 
and PSAT scores
Panel B. Regents math scores and
high school graduation
Panel C. Regents math scores and 
college attendance
Panel D. Regents math scores and 
log college quality
−10
−5
0
5
10
PSAT effect
−0.5
0
0.5
1
Regents math effect
−0.1
−0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
High school graduation effect
−0.5
0
0.5
1
Regents math effect
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
College attendance effect
−0.5
0
0.5
1
Regents math effect
−0.1
−0.05
0
0.05
0.1
log college quality effect
−0.5
0
0.5
1
Regents math effect
Figure 2. Relationships between Effects on Test Scores and Effects on Long-Run Outcomes
Notes: This figure plots estimates of causal effects on Regents math scores against estimates of effects on lon-
ger-run outcomes. Treatment effects are empirical Bayes posterior mean estimates of school average treatment 
effects from control function models. Panel A plots the relationship between Regents math effects and effects on 
PSAT scores. Panels B, C, and D show corresponding results for high school graduation, college attendance, and 
log college quality.


--- PAGE 22 ---
1523
ABDULKADIRO ˇGLU ET AL.: DO PARENTS VALUE SCHOOL EFFECTIVENESS?
VOL. 110 NO. 5
The final three rows of Table 6 quantify the contributions of covariances among 
peer quality, treatment effects, and match effects. As a result of the positive rela-
tionship between peer quality and school effectiveness, the covariance between ​​Q​j​​ 
and ​AT​E​j​​ substantially increases ­cross-school dispersion in mean outcomes. The 
covariances between match effects and the other variance components are negative. 
This indicates that students at highly effective schools and schools with ­higher-ability 
students are less appropriately matched on the heterogeneous component of treat-
ment effects, slightly reducing variation in school average outcomes.
D. Testing for Bias in Estimates of School Effectiveness
As described in Section  I, New York City’s centralized assignment mecha-
nism breaks ties at random for students with the same preferences and priorities. 
Abdulkadiroˇglu et al. (2017, 2019) derive methods for using the random assign-
ment implicit in such systems for impact evaluation. The core of this approach 
uses student preferences and priorities along with the structure of the assignment 
mechanism to derive a probability of assignment (propensity score) for each student 
to each school where random ­tie-breaking occurs. Conditioning on the propensity 
score is sufficient to isolate the random component of school assignment, generating 
valid instruments for school enrollment (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983). The priority 
information necessary to produce lottery propensity scores is only available for the 
2003 New York City high school applicant cohort, and random assignment occurs 
for only a minority of schools. While these data constraints prevent us from produc-
ing a ­lottery-based estimate of effectiveness for every school, we can use the shifts 
in school attendance resulting from these lottery assignments to test the accuracy of 
our ­value-added and control function estimates.
To implement these tests we first construct DA ­mechanism-based propensity 
scores and then apply the ­lottery-based test for bias in ­non-experimental estimators 
Table 6—Decomposition of School Average Outcomes
Regents  
math
PSAT 
score/10
High school 
graduation
College 
attendance
log college 
quality
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Total variance of average outcome
0.191
1.586
0.012
0.016
0.021
Variance of peer quality
0.093
0.781
0.010
0.010
0.009
Variance of ATE
0.054
0.160
0.002
0.003
0.004
Variance of match
0.008
0.027
0.002
0.002
0.001
2cov(peer quality, ATE)
0.081
0.745
0.005
0.008
0.011
2cov(peer quality, match)
−0.023
−0.061
−0.003
−0.003
−0.002
2cov(ATE, match)
−0.022
−0.068
−0.004
−0.005
−0.003
Notes: This table decomposes variation in average outcomes across schools into components explained by student 
characteristics, school average treatment effects (ATE), and the match between student characteristics and school 
effects. Estimates come from control function models adjusting for selection on unobservables. Column 1 shows 
results for Regents math scores in standard deviation units, column 2 reports estimates for PSAT scores, column 3 
displays estimates for high school graduation, column 4 reports results for college attendance, and column 5 shows 
results for log college quality. The first row reports the total variance of average outcomes across schools. The sec-
ond row reports the variance of peer quality, defined as the average predicted outcome as a function of student 
characteristics and unobserved tastes. The third row reports the variance of ATE, and the fourth row displays the 
variance of the match effect. The remaining rows show covariances of these components.


--- PAGE 23 ---
1524
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
of school effectiveness proposed by Angrist et al. (2016b, 2017). For a set of ​L​ lot-
teries, this test is implemented by estimating the following ­two-stage least squares 
(2SLS) system:
(12)	
​​Y​i​  =  ​κ​0​ + ϕ ​Y ˆ ​i​ + ​ ∑ 
ℓ=1
​ 
L
 ​κ​ℓ​ ​p​iℓ​ + ​e​i​,​
(13)	
​​Y ˆ ​i​  =  ​π​0​ + ​ ∑ 
ℓ=1
​ 
L
 ​[​π​ℓ​ ​Z​iℓ​ + ​ω​ℓ​ ​p​iℓ​]​ + ​υ​i​,​
where ​​Y ˆ ​i​​ is the fitted value generated by a ­non-experimental estimation proce-
dure (either ­value-added or control function), ​​Z​iℓ​​ is an indicator equal to 1 if stu-
dent ​i​ is assigned to school ​ℓ​, and ​​p​iℓ​​ is the propensity score measuring student ​i​’s 
probability of assignment to school ​ℓ​. The first-stage coefficients ​​π​ℓ​​ describe the 
­non-experimental estimator’s predicted effects of assignment in each lottery, which 
are ­nonzero because lottery offers shift students across schools. Angrist et al. (2017) 
shows that the “forecast coefficient” ​ϕ​ should equal 1 if the estimator used to gen-
erate ​​Y ˆ ​i​​ correctly predicts the effects of random lottery assignments on average, 
while the overidentification test for the system defined by (12) and (13) measures 
whether the estimator has the same predictive validity in every lottery. As discussed 
in Angrist et al. (2016b), the combination of these restrictions can be viewed as a 
Hausman (1983)-style test comparing ­lottery-based instrumental variables (IV) and 
OLS ­value-added estimates. If the restrictions underlying the ­value-added model are 
true, the ­value-added estimates should match ­lottery-based estimates of the same 
causal parameters.
As shown in Table 7, this ­lottery-based test suggests that our ­value-added and 
control function estimates accurately capture the causal effects of schools on stu-
dent outcomes.10 Column 1 reports tests of an “uncontrolled” model that measures 
school effectiveness as the unadjusted mean outcome at the school. This model gen-
erates forecast coefficients far from one and decisive rejections of the overiden-
tification test for all three outcomes available for the 2003 cohort (Regents math, 
PSAT scores, and high school graduation), indicating that the available lotteries 
have power to detect bias in the most naïve nonexperimental estimators. Columns 2 
and 3 show that the addition of controls for observed student characteristics gener-
ates forecast coefficients much closer to 1 and overidentification tests that generally 
do not reject at conventional levels. Unfortunately, we cannot use lotteries to vali-
date our estimates for postsecondary outcomes since college attendance data are not 
available for the 2003 applicant cohort, so estimates for these outcomes should be 
viewed more cautiously.
While the estimates in Table 7 are encouraging, it’s worth noting that the lotteries 
available in New York may have weak power to detect bias in our ­value-added and 
control function models. Specifically, the first stage ­F-statistics for equation (13) 
are below the ­rule-of-thumb value of 10 commonly used to diagnose weak instru-
ments (Staiger and Stock 1997), implying that the lotteries tend to shift students 
10 We validate our approach to reconstructing school lotteries by reporting relationships between lottery offers 
and students characteristics in Appendix Table  A7. Without controls for propensity scores, school offers are 
strongly correlated with baseline test scores and other observables, but we cannot reject that offers at all schools are 
independent of observed characteristics after controlling for the propensity scores. This indicates that our strategy 
successfully isolates randomized lottery assignments.


--- PAGE 24 ---
1525
ABDULKADIRO ˇGLU ET AL.: DO PARENTS VALUE SCHOOL EFFECTIVENESS?
VOL. 110 NO. 5
across schools with similar estimated effectiveness. Columns 4–6 demonstrate that 
we obtain similar results based on the Unbiased Jackknife Instrumental Variables 
(UJIVE) estimator proposed by Kolesár (2013). The UJIVE estimator performs 
well with weak instruments and (unlike other common approaches such as limited 
information maximum likelihood) it is robust to the presence of treatment effect 
heterogeneity. The UJIVE estimates suggest that our ­non-experimental estimators 
are accurate, particularly the control function estimator, for which we cannot reject 
forecast unbiasedness or the overidentifying restrictions for any outcome (we reject 
forecast unbiasedness for the ­value-added estimator for PSAT scores). The similar-
ity of 2SLS and UJIVE also eases concerns about weak instrument bias in 2SLS, 
though the weak first stage also indicates that tests based on both estimators are 
Table 7—Lottery-Based Tests for Bias in Estimates of School Effectiveness
2SLS
UJIVE
Uncontrolled Value-added
Control 
function
Uncontrolled Value-added
Control 
function
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A. Math
Forecast coefficient
0.599
0.965
0.967
0.598
0.961
0.963
(0.040)
(0.038)
(0.038)
(0.040)
(0.046)
(0.045)
p-value
0.000
0.354
0.388
0.000
0.343
0.376
Overid. ​χ​ 2​(123) stat.
174.1
84.88
86.50
174.1
84.88
86.50
p-value
0.000
0.996
0.995
0.002
0.996
0.995
First-stage F-stat.
91.1
6.1
5.9
91.1
6.1
5.9
Number of lotteries
124
124
Number of students
22,515 
22,515 
Panel B. PSAT
Forecast coefficient
0.306
0.879
0.912
0.296
0.815
0.862
(0.049)
(0.048)
(0.048)
(0.050)
(0.083)
(0.084)
p-value
0.000
0.012
0.066
0.000
0.025
0.101
Overid. ​χ​ 2​(123) stat.
145.8
112.9
106.8
145.7
111.7
106.1
p-value
0.079
0.732
0.851
0.0792
0.759
0.861
First-stage F-stat.
62.9
2.3
2.1
62.9
2.3
2.1
Number of lotteries
124
124
Number of students
16,554 
16,554 
Panel C. High school graduation
Forecast coefficient
0.333
0.905
0.914
0.329
0.893
0.901
(0.063)
(0.076)
(0.076)
(0.064)
(0.093)
(0.094)
p-value
0.000
0.214
0.262
0.000
0.245
0.295
Overid. ​χ​ 2​(123) stat.
205.1
145.6
147.7
205.1
145.6
147.7
p-value
0.000
0.080
0.064
0.000
0.080
0.064
First-stage F-stat.
92.1
5.4
5.0
92.1
5.4
5.0
Number of lotteries
124
124
Number of students
32,131 
32,131 
Notes: This table reports the results of lottery-based tests for bias in estimates of school effectiveness. The sample 
is restricted to students who have nondegenerate risk for at least one school and lotteries with 100 or more students 
at risk. Students are considered to have risk at a given school if their propensity score is strictly between 0 and 1 and 
they are in a score cell with variation in school offers. Columns 1 and 4 measure school effectiveness as the school 
mean outcome, columns 2 and 5 use value-added estimates, and columns 3 and 6 use control function estimates. 
Forecast coefficients and overidentification tests in columns 1–3 come from two-stage least squares regressions of 
test scores on the fitted values from the non-lottery estimation procedure, instrumenting with school-specific lot-
tery offer indicators and controlling for school-specific propensity scores. Columns 4–6 use the Unbiased Jackknife 
Instrumental Variables (UJIVE) estimator of Kolesár (2013) instead of 2SLS.


--- PAGE 25 ---
1526
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MAY 2020
likely to have low power. Taken together, the results in Table 7 suggest that our esti-
mation strategies generate reliable measures of causal effects, though the available 
lottery variation may be insufficient to detect modest violations.
V.  Preferences, Peer Quality, and School Effectiveness
A. Productivity versus Peers
The last step of our analysis compares the relative strength of peer quality and 
school effectiveness as predictors of parent preferences. Table 8 reports estimates 
of equation (11) for Regents math scores, first including ​​Q​ j​ ∗​​ and ​AT​E​ j​ ∗​​ one at a time 
and then including both variables simultaneously. Mean utilities, peer quality, and 
treatment effects are scaled in standard deviations of their respective ­school-level 
distributions, so the estimates can be interpreted as the standard deviation change in 
mean utility associated with a 1 standard deviation increase in ​​Q​j​​ or ​AT​E​j​​.
Bivariate regressions show that school popularity is positively correlated with 
both peer quality and school effectiveness. Results based on the OLS ­value-added 
model, reported in columns 1 and 2 of panel A, imply that a 1 standard deviation 
increase in ​​Q​j​​ is associated with a 0.42 standard deviation increase in mean utility, 
while a 1 standard deviation increase in ​AT​E​j​​ is associated with a 0.24 standard devi-
ation increase in mean utility. The latter result contrasts with studies reporting no 
average test score impact of attending preferred schools (Cullen, Jacob, and Levitt 
2006; Hastings, Kane, and Staiger 2009). These studies rely on admission lotteries 
that shift relatively small numbers of students across a limited range of schools. Our 
results show that looking across all high schools in New York City, more popular 
schools tend to be more effective on average.
While preferences are positively correlated with school effectiveness, however, 
this relationship is entirely explained by peer quality. Column 3 of panel A shows 
that when both variables are included together, the coefficient on peer quality is 
essentially unchanged, while the coefficient on the average treatment effect is ren-
dered small and statistically insignificant. The ​AT​E​j​​ coefficient also remains precise: 
we can rule out increases in mean utility on the order of 0.06 standard deviations 
associated with a 1 standard deviation change in school ­value-added at conventional 
significance levels. The control function estimates in columns 5–7 are similar to the 
­value-added estimates, showing no association between school effectiveness and 
popularity after controlling for peer quality.
Columns 4 and 8 of Table 8 explore the role of treatment effect heterogeneity by 
adding posterior mean predictions of match quality to equation (11), also scaled 
in standard deviation units of the distribution of match effects across schools and 
cells.11 The match coefficient is negative for both the ­value-added and control func-
tion models, and the control function estimate is statistically significant. This reflects 
the negative correlation between baseline test score slope coefficients and peer 
11 Equation (11) captures the projection of cell mean utility on peer quality and cell mean treatment effects. 
In the control function model the projection of ­student-specific utility on ­student-specific treatment effects also 
includes the idiosyncratic match component ​φ ​η​ij​​. Our small estimate of the matching coefficient ​φ​ implies this 
term is negligible, so we focus on relationships at the cell mean level for both the ­value-added and control function 
models.
