

--- PAGE 1 ---
American Economic Review 2020, 110(3): 824–859 
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20180511
824
Maternal Depression, Women’s Empowerment, and 
Parental Investment: Evidence from a Randomized 
Controlled Trial†
By Victoria Baranov, Sonia Bhalotra, Pietro Biroli,  
and Joanna Maselko*
We evaluate the ­medium-term impacts of treating maternal depres-
sion on women’s mental health, financial empowerment, and parent-
ing decisions. We leverage variation induced by a ­cluster-randomized 
controlled trial that provided psychotherapy to 903 prenatally 
depressed mothers in rural Pakistan. It was one of the world’s largest 
psych­otherapy interventions, and it dramatically reduced postpartum 
depression. Seven years after psychotherapy concluded, we returned 
to the study site to find that impacts on women’s mental health had 
persisted, with a 17 percent reduction in depression rates. The inter-
vention also improved women’s financial empowerment and increased 
both time- and ­money-intensive parental investments by between 0.2 
and 0.3 standard deviations. (JEL G51, I12, J16, O15)
Major Depressive Disorder is the single most important contributor to Years 
Lived with Disability, estimated to affect 13 percent of the global population (Vos 
et al. 2012). The burden of depression is about twice as high for women (DeRubeis, 
Siegle, and Hollon 2008), and women of ­child-bearing age are especially at risk 
due to higher rates of perinatal depression. Prevalence of perinatal depression 
ranges from around 10 percent in ­high-income countries to 20 percent in low- and 
* Baranov: Department of Economics, University of Melbourne (­email: victoria.baranov@unimelb.edu.
au); Bhalotra: Department of Economics, University of Essex, and ISER (­email: srbhal@essex.ac.uk); Biroli: 
Department of Economics, University of Zurich  (­email: pietro.biroli@uzh.ch); Maselko: Department of 
Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North Carolina (email: jmaselko@unc.edu). 
Esther Duflo was the ­coeditor for this article. The authors thank Grand Challenges Canada for funding this research 
under their Saving Brains Program grant number 0058-03 and the Centre for Microsocial Change at ISER, Essex, 
for further support from the ESRC Centre grant ES/L009153/1. We are grateful to Atif Rahman, who designed 
the Thinking Health Program and led the implementation of the original trial, as well as Siham Sikander and his 
colleagues at the Human Development Research Foundation in Pakistan for implementing the original trial and the 
follow-up. We thank Atif Rahman and Siham Sikander for sharing the baseline and early follow-up data and for 
providing valuable insights. We received helpful feedback from Prashant Bharadwaj, David Byrne, Flávio Cunha, 
Alex Frankel, James Fenske, Johannes Haushofer, James Heckman, Anandi Mani, Satadru Mukherjee, Berk Özler, 
Robert DeRubeis, Kjell Salvanes, Agne Suziedelyte, Marcos ­Vera-Hernández, and seminar participants at Oxford, 
IFS, Essex, Alicante, Odense, HCEO Chicago, University of Michigan, University of Hawaii, University of Sydney, 
University of Pennsylvania (Psychology), Princeton, MIT, and conference participants at CSAE, PacDev, NEUDC, 
ASSA, and RES. Jane Carroll, Peter Robertson, and Simona Sartor provided excellent research assistance. All 
errors and opinions are our own.
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20180511 to visit the article page for additional materials and author  
disclosure statements.


--- PAGE 2 ---
825
BARANOV ET AL.: MATERNAL DEPRESSION AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
VOL. 110 NO. 3
­middle-income countries, where the condition often goes undiagnosed and hence 
untreated (Gelaye et al. 2016).
Little is known about the causal effects of depression or depression treatment 
on economic ­decision-making. Depression is characterized by symptoms ­including 
sadness, pessimism, and loss of agency, which create the potential for it to impair 
productivity, hamper economic ­decision-making, and impact women’s financial 
empowerment (Kessler and Frank 1997, Currie and Madrian 1999). Women tend to 
have low levels of control over household spending, especially in ­low-income settings. 
Depression may exacerbate this by reducing labor supply (de Quidt and Haushofer 
2016) or else by blunting the bargaining power of women. Furthermore, since 
­women’s share of household income influences expenditure on children (Lundberg, 
Pollak, and Wales 1997), perinatal depression may disadvantage children. While 
a growing literature highlights the importance of parental investments in early 
­childhood for later life outcomes (Almond and Mazumder 2013), there is no causal 
evidence that treating perinatal depression can influence parenting decisions.
We leverage experimental variation from one of the largest psychotherapy trials 
in the world to investigate the impacts of treating depression on ­decision-making. 
The intervention provided cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) to perinatally 
depressed women in rural Pakistan and was shown to significantly reduce depres-
sion in the first year postpartum (Rahman et al. 2008). The program has been hailed 
as ­evidence  that  a ­low-cost, ­community-based intervention can have substantial 
impacts on depression, and it was recently adopted by the World Health Organization 
(WHO) as a model for other countries. We investigate whether the reduction in 
­postpartum depression placed women in the treatment arm on a better trajectory, 
generating future improvements in their mental health, their economic status, and 
their parenting decisions. Seven years after the end of the intervention, we returned 
to the study site and gathered rich data with multiple indicators of ­women’s ­mental 
health, financial empowerment, parenting choices, fertility, investments in children, 
and child developmental outcomes. In addition to providing some of the first causal 
estimates of economic impacts of treating depression, our study allows us to ­evaluate 
impacts over a longer horizon.
The psychotherapy intervention we study, called the Thinking Healthy Program, 
was implemented across 40 communities in rural Pakistan. One-half of the commu-
nities were randomly assigned to the treatment arm, and the remaining half served 
as controls. All pregnant women in these communities were clinically assessed 
for depression, and all 903 women diagnosed as depressed were included in the 
trial. Women in both arms received 16 home visits from community health work-
ers, starting in the third trimester of pregnancy and ending when the children were 
ten months old. In the control communities, women received routine maternal and 
health services. In the treated communities, women additionally received the CBT 
component of the intervention which focused on identifying and modifying cogni-
tive distortions common in depression, using techniques of active listening, collab-
oration with the family, and guided discovery of healthy thinking.
We successfully located 585 (65  percent) of the original trial participants 
enrolled at baseline. In addition, we recruited 300 ­mother-child dyads from 
among the women excluded from the trial because they did not suffer prenatal 
depression at baseline. This sample allows us to evaluate the depression gap in 


--- PAGE 3 ---
826
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2020
outcomes between untreated prenatally depressed women and women who were 
not depressed in ­pregnancy. We also compare the magnitudes of treatment effects to 
these ­descriptive gaps.
We first demonstrate that the CBT intervention had persistent impacts on 
­mental health. At the ­7-year mark, the intervention reduced rates of depression 
by 5 ­percentage points, a clinically significant size, although smaller than at the 
­1-year mark, when the reduction was 39 percentage points. The narrowing of the 
gap between treated and control women is driven by spontaneous recovery in the 
control group, as the share of women in the treated arm who were assessed as having 
no depression was similar in the 1- and ­7-year ­follow-ups. This is the first evidence 
of the persistence of the mental health benefits of a ­one-off CBT intervention as far 
out as seven years, and it is important given the chronicity of depression. We also 
find that the mental health benefits of treatment, particularly in the longer run, are 
significantly larger for mothers who had been pregnant with a girl rather than a boy 
at the start of the intervention.
Turning to outcomes related to women’s ­decision-making, the intervention had 
lasting positive impacts on an index of the financial empowerment of women, which 
we estimate was 0.29 standard deviations (SD) higher among intervention arm 
women. In particular, they were 9 percentage points more likely to have control over 
household spending, a 17 percent increase over the control group. We also identify 
a 0.2–0.3 SD improvement in indices of time- and ­money-intensive parental invest-
ments. For example, we find that children in the intervention arm were more likely 
to attend better quality and private schools, and to have more learning materials in 
the home, all of which were objectively measured. Mothers also reported higher 
expected grade attainment. However, we find no discernible average differences in 
parenting style or fertility between women in the treated and control communities. 
The intervention substantially narrowed or closed the gaps in empowerment and 
parental investments associated with being depressed. As there is negative selection 
into depression, the descriptive gaps are likely to be larger than causal differences. 
This is a testament to the power of the intervention.
Treatment effects are consistently larger for mothers who were pregnant with 
a girl at the time of the intervention: 0.45 SD increase in financial empowerment, 
0.47  SD for monetary investments, 0.28  SD for ­time-intensive investments, and 
0.24 SD for parenting style, compared with estimates indistinguishable from zero 
for boys. With the exception of time investments, the coefficients are statistically 
significantly different by gender. This pattern of heterogeneity is not surprising in 
light of the fact that the ­longer-run mental health benefits of CBT were concentrated 
in mothers of girls. Control group means in the ­7-year ­follow-up reveal that mothers 
who were pregnant with girls were disempowered and more likely to be depressed 
relative to mothers of boys, and monetary investments in girls were smaller. The 
intervention narrowed these gender gaps.
Our finding that treatment improves women’s control over household spending, 
along with increasing investments in children, lines up with evidence that additional 
resources in the hands of women tend to be directed toward children (Duflo 2003; 
Bhalotra and ­Clots-Figueras 2014). Moreover, increased control over spending was 
much larger and only statistically significant for mothers of girls, which is likely 
why girls received higher parental investments.


--- PAGE 4 ---
827
BARANOV ET AL.: MATERNAL DEPRESSION AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
VOL. 110 NO. 3
Since the intervention empowered mothers and increased investments in children, 
we expected it to generate improvements in child development. However, effects 
on cognitive or ­socio-emotional development at age 7 are small and imprecisely 
estimated (confirming some results shown in Maselko et al. 2015) and effects on 
physical health and child survival are only suggestive. Our investigations confirm 
that, while the indicators we use appear to be appropriate for the context, there are 
no sizable effects in any part of the distribution, and there is no evidence of com-
pensating investments in the control arm. Correlating parental investments to chil-
dren outcomes, and comparing children of depressed women in the control arm to 
children of women who were not prenatally depressed, indicates that the expected 
effect sizes might be too small to detect at this age, and might require larger sam-
ples. It may be that returns to increased parental investments appeared and then 
faded (Andrew et al. 2018) or that they will emerge at a later stage of the ­life cycle 
(Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua 2006).
Finally, we study the impacts of the intervention on all other available domains of 
behavior with a view to illuminating the mechanisms at play. We find little evidence 
that the treatment influenced the woman’s physical health or her husband’s income 
over time. There are indications that it improved the quality of the relationship with 
the husband and the probability of ­coresidence with the grandmother of the child, 
but these effects were small and were not sustained in the longer run. We do find that 
the intervention led to a sustained increase in perceived social support, a measure 
closely linked with mental health. While it is difficult to identify a single mechanism 
that explains the persistent effects on empowerment and parenting, improved mental 
health appears to be a likely channel.
Our results provide the first evidence that positive impacts of CBT on ­mental 
health persist seven years after the end of treatment.1 For more than one-quarter 
of patients, depression is chronic (DeRubeis, Siegle, and  Hollon 2008), and an 
­episode of maternal depression raises the chances of experiencing another by about 
50 ­percent (Shi and Altshuler 2004) making it important to identify treatments that 
generate sustained recovery.
The main contribution of this study lies in providing the first causal evidence 
that treating depression can have large impacts on economic ­decision-making 
and, remarkably, impacts that are evident seven years after the end of a ­one-off 
­intervention.2 Our results are in line with the findings of two recent studies which 
have reported large benefits of ­CBT-based interventions. Targeted at specific pop-
ulations with impulse control problems, such as ­crime-prone youth in Chicago 
(Heller et al. 2017) and Liberia (Blattman, Jamison, and Sheridan 2017), these 
1 We identified six trials with ­follow-up beyond 24 months. The longest ­follow-up was up to 6 years after 
­completion of CBT with a sample size of 40 (Fava et  al. 1998). The largest trial had 248 with a ­follow-up 
of 3.5 years (Cuijpers et al. 2013, Wiles et al. 2016). None of these trials studied CBT alone; they included 
­pharmacological treatment.
2 A large literature links depression with financial and labor market outcomes (see Mintz et al. 1992 and Kessler 
2012 for a ­meta-analysis of evidence based on associations) and a handful of randomized controlled trials show 
­short-term effects of psychotherapy interventions on days worked or the ability to perform labor (Patel et al. 2017, 
Buttorff et al. 2012, Bolton et al. 2003). Several studies in the economics literature have estimated the impacts of 
mental health on economic ­decision-making or labor market outcomes, primarily using instrumental variables (e.g., 
death of a friend, religiosity) for identification. See Frijters, Johnston, and Shields (2014) for one such example 
and a review.


--- PAGE 5 ---
828
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2020
­interventions were effectively “­noncognitive” skills training and did not aim to 
improve mental health.
This study also ties into other strands of the literature. First, we contrib-
ute to a growing literature on women’s empowerment (Duflo 2012, Almås et al. 
2018), ­offering the first evidence that treating perinatal depression may improve 
­women’s financial empowerment in the medium term. Many successful interven-
tions for ­women’s empowerment (education, fertility planning, cash transfers, 
savings accounts) target adolescent girls (Bandiera et al. 2017), but have often 
failed to ­generate persistent effects (Baird and Özler 2016), possibly because of 
social ­constraints (Buvinic and ­Furst-Nichols 2014, Field et al. 2016). Our results 
­suggest that interventions aimed at reducing maternal depression might be an effec-
tive ­policy tool to increase women’s empowerment even in difficult contexts, for 
­example among adult women or when social constraints are binding.
Second, we provide causal evidence that treating maternal depression impacts 
investments in children. A large literature has explored the ­later-life consequences 
of shocks to the physical health of pregnant women or infants (Almond and Currie 
2011; Almond, Currie, and Duque 2018; Bhalotra, Karlsson, and Nilsson 2017). 
Although a few recent studies have analyzed maternal stress (Aizer, Stroud, 
and Buka 2016) or bereavement during pregnancy (Persson and ­Rossin-Slater 2018; 
Black, Devereux, and Salvanes 2016), much less is known about the impacts of 
maternal mental health. Recent studies have emphasized the importance of ­parental 
­investments (Almond and  Mazumder 2013, Cunha 2017) and early childhood 
­stimulation (Walker et al. 2005, Attanasio et al. 2014, Doyle et al. 2017), both of 
which may be compromised by the mother’s depression. The potential costs of 
­failing to treat maternal depression are large, because early childhood skills influ-
ence adult health and earnings.
I.  Conceptual Background
In order to better understand the mechanisms through which depression treatment 
can influence maternal ­decision-making, we outline a framework that serves the 
dual purpose of systematizing our thinking and helping us summarize the literature 
on depression as it relates to ­decision-making. A sketch of a model reflecting the dis-
cussion here is in the working paper version of this paper. In view of the symptoms 
that characterize depression, it may impact decisions through preferences, expecta-
tions, or constraints. Potential changes in preferences include time discounting and 
the disutility of effort. Depression or negative affect may encourage time discount-
ing (Lempert and Pizzagalli 2010). Depression has been linked to impulsivity and 
inconsistent intertemporal choices (Takahashi et al. 2008), and to ­present-biased 
behaviors such as drinking, smoking, or suicide (Dennhardt and  Murphy 2011, 
Imhoff et  al. 2014). A second channel is a higher cost of effort (Cohen et  al. 
1982, Den Hartog et al. 2003), associated with stress and fatigue, which may, for 
instance, increase the mental cost of simple tasks such as interacting with the child 
(Bhalotra et al. 2017) or advocating for oneself, thus reducing bargaining power 
(Mirowsky 1985). Depression may also impact the marginal utility of consumption 
or ­leisure (Kung, Johnston, and Shields 2018), anhedonia being a classic symptom 
of depression.


--- PAGE 6 ---
829
BARANOV ET AL.: MATERNAL DEPRESSION AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
VOL. 110 NO. 3
Depression may affect expectations, or subjective beliefs over the distribution 
of shocks, as posited by Beck’s cognitive theory (1967, 1979). It may induce 
a ­pessimistic view in the mother of her ability to bargain or influence future 
outcomes such as her child’s skills (de Quidt and  Haushofer 2016, MacLeod 
and Salaminiou 2001). Alternatively, depression may make mothers more pes-
simistic about the returns to parenting investments, for instance by making them 
believe that negative shocks are more likely. By distorting beliefs, depression 
might lead to lower ­aspirations and, thereby, lower child investments (Dalton, 
Ghosal, and Mani 2016).
Finally, depression may impact women’s ­decision-making through tightening 
constraints, for instance, it could increase sick days and reduce disposable time 
(Grossman 1972) or lower the effectiveness of maternal investments and tighten 
productivity constraints. Depression has been linked to lower productivity in the 
labor force (Lerner et  al. 2004, Lerner and  Henke 2008). In home production, 
depression could reduce maternal productivity in combining investments to improve 
child quality, holding fixed the level of inputs. This might occur if depression affects 
cognitive function (Den Hartog et al. 2003), or the quality of ­parent-child interac-
tions (Ronda 2016).
II.  The Intervention
The Thinking Healthy Program (THP) was a cluster randomized trial addressing 
perinatal depression in rural Punjab, Pakistan. Perinatal depression is defined as a 
depressive disorder with onset at any time during pregnancy or within the first year 
of birth. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, IV (­DSM-IV) 
criteria for diagnosis of perinatal depression are the same as for depression at any 
other stage of life. They include at least five of these nine symptoms, present nearly 
every day within a ­two-week period: (i) feelings of sadness, emptiness, or hopeless-
ness, nearly every day, for most of the day or the observation of a depressed mood 
made by others; (ii) loss of interest or pleasure in activities; (iii) weight loss or 
decreased appetite; (iv) changes in sleep patterns; (v) feelings of restlessness; (vi) 
loss of energy; (vii) feelings of worthlessness or guilt; (viii) loss of concentration or 
increased indecisiveness; (ix) recurrent thoughts of death, with or without plans of 
suicide (American Psychiatric Association 2013).
The trial was randomized across 40 clusters, these being Union Councils, 
the smallest geopolitical unit: 20 clusters were randomized into ­receiving 
the intervention and 20 to the control arm. Women were enrolled during  
April  2005 to March 2006. All women in their third trimester of pregnancy 
(­married, ages 16–45, no other significant illness) who met the ­DSM-IV ­criteria 
for Major Depressive Episode were invited to participate in the study. A total of 
3,898 women were ­identified, with 8 percent refusing before any assessment, and 
2  percent were not found. Rates were not different by treatment status, online 
Appendix Table A.3 shows sample numbers by treatment cluster through time.
A total of 3,518 women were assessed for clinical depression, with 903 
(26 ­percent) identified as prenatally depressed, a prevalence consistent with pre-
vious estimates for this region (Rahman, Iqbal, and Harrington 2003). There were 
463 depressed mothers in the clusters randomized to the intervention, and 440 in the 


--- PAGE 7 ---
830
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2020
control arm. Only women diagnosed as depressed completed the baseline survey. 
To our knowledge, this is the largest psychotherapy intervention to treat mild to 
moderate depression evaluated to date.3
All women who were offered participation in the study accepted, and those who 
were not offered participation were unable to receive the treatment or other thera-
pies. There were no psychologists in the public sector, and only three psychiatrists 
(based in Rawalpindi city) for the whole district. The field team confirmed that 
antidepressant drugs were not readily available to this population.
The THP intervention was based on principles of cognitive behavioral ­therapy 
(CBT), a class of psychosocial interventions that are the most widely used 
­evidence-based practice for treating mental disorders (Field, Beeson, and  Jones 
2015). CBT focuses on the development of personal coping strategies that target 
solving current problems and changing unhelpful patterns in cognition (thoughts, 
beliefs, and attitudes), behaviors, and emotional regulation. ­Meta-analyses of CBT 
indicate that it is often at least as effective as pharmacotherapy (Bolier et al. 2013, 
Tolin 2010, Cuijpers et al. 2008). Through extensive piloting (Rahman 2007), the 
original study team designed an intervention which could be delivered by primary 
health workers based in the village (the essential features are summarized in online 
Appendix Table A.1). They developed a manual with ­step-by-step instructions for 
each session to train the health workers and for them to keep for reference.4
The intervention was delivered by Lady Health Workers (LHWs), appointed 
by the federal government to deliver community health services. During the 
CBT ­sessions, LHWs focused on identifying and modifying cognitive distor-
tions ­common in depression, such as how the mother viewed her own health, 
her ­relationship with the baby, and the people around her (changing “unhealthy 
thinking” to “healthy ­thinking”). Mothers received health education and support-
ing materials with ­pictorial and verbal key messages to facilitate the discovery of 
alternative health beliefs. The intervention was based on a psychosocial model and 
not presented as a treatment for a mental health problem. While other studies have 
provided CBT to perinatally depressed mothers in developing countries (Cooper 
et al. 2009; Gao et al. 2010; Lara, Navarro, and Navarrete 2010), the component 
of the intervention that provided guided discovery of healthy behavior is unique to 
this study. The CBT intervention was delivered at a relatively low cost of US$10 
per woman.
The time line for the intervention and all ­follow-ups is summarized in Figure 1. 
Every woman in the trial received 16 home visits from an LHW. These were deliv-
ered as weekly sessions for four weeks in the last pregnancy month, three sessions 
in the first postnatal month, and monthly sessions for the following nine months. 
Mothers in the control arm received enhanced routine care with an equal number 
of visits, enhanced not in content but because the frequency of visits was greater 
than the usual, which was once a month. We have no data on the duration of each 
session but it is likely they were longer in the treated clusters on account of the 
3 See Cuijpers et al. (2008) and Cuijpers, van Straten, and Warmerdam (2008) for ­meta-analyses. The authors 
have compiled a database (www.evidencebasedpsychotherapies.org) which includes interventions to January 1, 
2013. From 2013, we searched all completed psychotherapy interventions posted on clinicaltrials.gov.
4 The manual can be downloaded from the WHO website: www.who.int/mental_health/­maternal-child/think-
ing_healthy.	


--- PAGE 8 ---
831
BARANOV ET AL.: MATERNAL DEPRESSION AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
VOL. 110 NO. 3
additional content. The standard health visits included advice on infant health issues 
such as tetanus, immunizations, and breastfeeding.5 Each LHW was responsible for 
approximately 1,000 women in her catchment area. There were a total of 40 LHWs 
who visited either treatment or control mothers. Thus, the catchment areas of LHWs 
were nested within clusters to avoid contamination.
A. ­Follow-Up Surveys
The THP study conducted ­follow-up surveys at 6 and 12 months ­postpartum 
to evaluate maternal mental health, infant outcomes, and parenting behavior. 
The ­intervention led to large (approximately 30  percentage point) reductions in 
­depression rates at 6 and 12 months, increased the frequency of interaction with the 
infant for both mothers and fathers (based on ­self-report), but showed no discernible 
effects on infant growth (Rahman et al. 2008).
There had been no additional contact with participants since the ­12-month 
­follow-up until 2013. We worked with the same NGO that conducted the interven-
tion to implement a ­follow-up study to assess whether the reduction in postpartum 
depression had lasting effects on mothers and children. Five field supervisors, blind 
to the woman’s trial (and baseline depression) status, worked with LHWs to contact 
participants who had completed the ­12-month ­follow-up. Additional queries with 
neighbors or relatives, as well as local hospital record checks assisted this. A field 
team of 9 assessors, also blind to treatment status, worked mid-2013 to early 2014. 
Each dyad interview had two parts, one in the woman’s home and the second in the 
child’s school or the LHW’s house, so as to administer the cognitive function tests 
to the child in a quiet and more standardized environment than the home.
We enrolled 300 new ­mother-child dyads from the sample of women who were 
assessed for the original THP study but did not meet the ­DSM-IV criteria for 
major depression. As we had limited baseline data for these women, we used each 
­participant’s village and LHW assignment to identify a prenatally ­nondepressed 
5 This enhanced frequency appears to be associated with better child outcomes for the control sample relative 
to the overall region. We find an infant mortality rate of 4.6 percent, approximately ­two-thirds of that of the Punjab 
region. Rates of breastfeeding and completing immunization in our control sample were also higher than in the 
­2012–2013 Pakistan Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS). 
Figure 1. Time Line of Intervention and ­Follow-Ups
2005
2013
Baseline
Intervention
start
1st
“6-month” 
follow-up
3rd
“7-year” 
follow-up
 
−3m −1m
6m
12m
8yrs
Child
age:
10m
2nd
Intervention
complete
“12-month” 
follow-up
Women assessed 
for depression


--- PAGE 9 ---
832
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2020
woman to contact for ­reenrollment. A full ­follow-up interview was completed by 
this additional sample, but the only baseline characteristic available for them is their 
depression status.
III.  Data
We provide a brief description of the data and outcomes below. A detailed descrip-
tion of the data, analysis of sample flow, balance, and attrition are found in online 
Appendix Section D.
Sample.—Our analytical sample comprised the experimental group of mothers 
randomized into treatment or control arms, and the ­nonexperimental group who 
were not depressed at baseline. The starting experimental sample consisted of 
463 treated and 440 control mothers. At the ­7-year ­follow-up, we located 295 of 
the ­control dyads and 289 of the intervention arm dyads, together correspond-
ing to 64.8 percent of the baseline sample. One-third of the attrition was due to 
child ­mortality which was not different by treatment status. The ­nonexperimental 
group interviewed at the ­7-year ­follow-up consisted of 300 ­mother-child dyads, 
150 from each arm.
Baseline Balance.—Baseline balance across intervention arm was achieved 
for all observable characteristics other than household composition (Table  1). 
Treated women were more likely to have their ­mother-in-law or mother present 
(each ­marginally significant). Nevertheless, an overall joint test of balance yields a 
­p-value of 0.13.
Imbalance in baseline characteristics was mostly driven by mothers of boys, 
while  the sample of mothers of girls appears more balanced: a joint test of 
­balance yields a ­p-value of 0.04 for mothers of boys, and a ­p-value of 0.81 for moth-
ers of girls (see Appendix Table A2).
The few imbalances already present at baseline were exacerbated in the 
­follow-up  samples at 1 and 7  years. Besides persistent differences in the 
­presence  of  the ­grandmother in the household, treated group women reported 
about 0.7 more years of education, and 0.3 fewer children. In the ­7-year ­follow-up 
­sample, treated mothers also reported higher perceived social support at baseline. 
A joint test of balance for the ­7-year ­follow-up sample yields a ­p-value of 0.01. 
We discuss how we address this imbalance in the next section.
Attrition.—Seven years after the end of the intervention, we located 585 
(65  ­percent) of the baseline sample, 289 / 463 (62  percent) in the intervention 
arm and 296 / 440 (67 percent) in the control arm. Attrition was not significantly 
­different by treatment status. A ­two-sample Wilcoxon ­rank-sum test of difference in 
means cannot reject the null of no difference, with a ­p-value of 0.12. Although fairly 
similar along most characteristics (Appendix Table A1), attritors (­lost-to-follow-up, 
LTFU) were less empowered, perceived less social support, and were more likely to 
work than mothers ­reenrolled at year 7. There were no significant differences at the 
5 ­percent level in baseline characteristics between treated and control LTFU moth-
ers, and we fail to reject the joint test that characteristics of attritors in treatment 


--- PAGE 10 ---
833
BARANOV ET AL.: MATERNAL DEPRESSION AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
VOL. 110 NO. 3
were different to controls (​ p  =  0.59​).6 Attrition patterns differed by the gender 
of the child in the womb at the start of the intervention. For mothers of girls, attri-
tion rates were very similar across trial arms, with 65 percent of the treatment arm 
located after 7 years and 66 percent of the control arm. By contrast, for mothers of 
boys, attrition rates were significantly higher in the treatment arm ( just 60 percent 
located, compared to 69 percent of controls, see online Appendix Table D.10).
Estimated treatment effects on 6- and ­12-month mental health outcomes are 
the same regardless of whether we use the full sample or the ­7-year ­follow-up 
­subsample (online Appendix Table D.11), suggesting that attrition was not system-
atically related to improvements in mental health. Across all the range of ­mental 
health ­outcomes, a joint test of whether treatment effects are different for the 
­7-year ­subsample yields a ­p-value  =  0.60 for the ­6-month outcomes and 0.95 for 
6 The average magnitude of the difference between attritors and ­nonattritors is about 0.07 standard deviations 
(of the control group), and the difference between treatment and control among attritors is 0.08 SD.
Table 1—Balance
Baseline sample observations = 903
­1-year sample 
observations = 704
­7-year sample 
observations = 585
Control 
mean
SD
­T-C 
diff.
­p-value
­T-C diff.
­p-value
­T-C 
diff.
­p-value
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Mother’s age
​27.00​
5.2
​− 0.51​
​0.14​
​− 0.39​
​0.30​
​− 0.32​
​0.44​
Mother’s height (m)
​1.56​
0.1
​0.00​
​0.32​
​0.01​
​0.17​
​0.01​
​0.18​
Mother’s BMI
​23.13​
4.1
​0.24​
​0.37​
​0.15​
​0.61​
​0.36​
​0.28​
Mother’s education
​3.87​
4.0
​0.37​
​0.17​
​0.75​
​0.01​
​0.71​
​0.03​
Empowered
​0.55​
0.5
​− 0.03​
​0.35​
​− 0.05​
​0.19​
​− 0.04​
​0.36​
Mother usually works
​0.03​
0.2
​− 0.01​
​0.25​
​− 0.01​
​0.43​
​− 0.01​
​0.38​
Parity
​2.33​
1.8
​− 0.17​
​0.15​
​− 0.29​
​0.03​
​− 0.34​
​0.02​
First child
​0.19​
0.4
​0.01​
​0.82​
​0.01​
​0.61​
​0.01​
​0.65​
Index child is female
​0.49​
0.5
​0.03​
​0.34​
​0.05​
​0.18​
​0.06​
​0.13​
Share children female
​0.52​
0.3
​0.02​
​0.44​
​0.00​
​0.93​
​0.01​
​0.84​
Depression score
​14.43​
4.0
​0.40​
​0.15​
​0.25​
​0.41​
​0.31​
​0.35​
Disability score
​8.30​
2.7
​− 0.17​
​0.34​
​− 0.16​
​0.45​
​− 0.03​
​0.88​
General functioning
​62.05​
5.3
​− 0.01​
​0.97​
​0.35​
​0.37​
​0.58​
​0.18​
Perceived social support
​44.49​
16
​1.08​
​0.32​
​1.82​
​0.13​
​2.63​
​0.05​
Joint/extended family
​0.57​
0.5
​0.04​
​0.27​
​0.05​
​0.17​
​0.06​
​0.18​
­Mother-in-law present
​0.40​
0.5
​0.06​
​0.05​
​0.08​
​0.02​
​0.09​
​0.04​
Mother’s mother present
​0.05​
0.2
​0.03​
​0.07​
​0.04​
​0.05​
​0.03​
​0.11​
Father’s education
​7.09​
3.9
​− 0.13​
​0.61​
​− 0.10​
​0.73​
​− 0.22​
​0.48​
Father employed
​0.91​
0.3
​− 0.01​
​0.53​
​− 0.02​
​0.50​
​− 0.00​
​0.88​
Not in manual labor
​0.29​
0.5
​− 0.01​
​0.80​
​0.01​
​0.86​
​0.00​
​0.93​
SES (0 = poor, 4 = rich)
​1.38​
1.0
​0.01​
​0.91​
​0.11​
​0.15​
​0.12​
​0.13​
Wealth index
​− 0.03​
2.0
​0.06​
​0.66​
​0.24​
​0.11​
​0.19​
​0.24​
LTFU from baseline
​0.33​
0.5
​0.05​
​0.14​
Joint test ( ­p-value)
​0.13​
​0.12​
​0.01​
Notes: This table tests for balance in the baseline, ­1-year ­follow-up (Rahman et al. 2008), and ­7-year ­follow-up 
samples. Columns 1 and 2 show the mean and standard deviation in the control group in the full baseline sample, 
and columns 3, 5, and 7 show the difference in means between treatment and control group, in the three ­different 
­samples. The respective ​p​-values are reported in columns 4, 6, and 8. LTFU from baseline = share of baseline 
respondents who are lost to ­follow-up. The Wealth index score is a ­19-item ­PCA-weighted index of assets (radio, 
TV, refrigerator, washing machine, air conditioning), house and roofing materials (brick walls, metal roof), and 
water and waste infrastructure (type of drinking water, flush toilet or any type of latrine).


--- PAGE 11 ---
834
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2020
­12-month outcomes. Differences in treatment effects across the different samples 
range between 2 and 5 percent of a standard deviation.
Nevertheless, we also assess the robustness of our results to accounting for attri-
tion in two ways (details are in online Appendix Section D.3). First, we calculate 
treatment effects using inverse probability weighting, where the weights are calcu-
lated as the predicted probability of being in the ­7-year ­follow-up sample based on 
the available baseline controls. Second, we calculate attrition bounds based on Lee 
(2009), which sorts the outcomes from best to worst within each treatment arm and 
then trims the sample from above and below to construct groups of equal size. Our 
conclusions are, in general, robust to these corrections.
A. Outcomes
Maternal Mental Health.—The THP intervention was designed to reduce the 
incidence of depression among prenatally depressed mothers. As such, it was 
­careful in measuring clinical depression. Maternal depression was assessed using 
the Structured Clinical Interview (SCID) for ­DSM-IV diagnosis. Evaluations to 
­diagnose major depressive episodes at baseline, ­6 months, and ­1 year were done by a 
psychiatrist. At the ­7-year ­follow-up, depression was again determined by the SCID, 
but administered by trained assessors. In addition to the binary indicator for major 
depression, the baseline, ­6-month, and ­1-year surveys also contained other indicators 
of mental health including the Hamilton Depression Rating (a measure of depres-
sion severity), Brief Disability Questionnaire (measure of how disabling symptoms 
are), and the Generalized Assessment of Functioning (­assessor-determined measure 
of functioning incorporating severity of symptoms and their effect on ­functioning). 
More detail with references to the validation and timing of the ­measures is in online 
Appendix Section J.
Mother’s ­Decision-Making.—We observe several measures related to maternal 
decisions and we group them into five categories: the mother’s financial empow-
erment, fertility trajectory, and parenting behaviors. Parenting is grouped into 
three  domains: ­time-intensive investment, ­money-intensive investment, and par-
enting style. For brevity, we label these categories “mother’s decision-making” 
since they are related to choices that mothers made. However, we acknowledge 
that these outcomes emerge from a more complex interplay between external con-
straints and household bargaining, and they are not solely dependent on mothers’ 
­decision-making.
We define financial empowerment as control over resources (as in Karlan et al. 
2017; Lavy, Lotti, and Yan 2016). In Pakistan, women’s empowerment is low, with 
strictly defined gender norms. Most women are confined to their homes, do housework 
for the extended family, and are excluded from ­decision-making (Ahmad and Khan 
2016). In our sample, only 3 percent of mothers reported usually working at baseline 
(recall they are pregnant at baseline), none were working at the 6- or the ­12-month 
­follow-ups, and only 12 percent worked 7 years after the end of the intervention.
We evaluate treatment effects on trajectories of empowerment and fertility, 
­leveraging data from earlier and later ­follow-up. For parenting inputs we rely on 
the extensive measures collected at the ­7-year ­follow-up, consisting of both mother 


--- PAGE 12 ---
835
BARANOV ET AL.: MATERNAL DEPRESSION AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
VOL. 110 NO. 3
reported and direct interviewer observations but we present results for parenting 
in infancy in the online Appendix (Table H.44). As we have numerous indicators 
within each domain, we generate summary indices. We describe the indicators suc-
cinctly here and provide detailed definitions and summary statistics in the online 
Appendix (Sections B.3–B.5 and Section J).
	
(i)	 Financial empowerment was measured using whether the woman was 
employed, her monthly earnings, and whether she had control over ­spending. 
We use all three measures from the ­7-year ­follow-up but include only ­control 
over spending from earlier waves as no women worked in the first year 
postpartum.7
	 (ii)	 Monetary investments included the school quality index, whether the index 
child attended private school, the mother’s expected grade attainment for 
the index child, the family’s education expenditures in the past month, as 
well as the learning material and physical environment ­subscales of the 
HOME inventory. Since expected grade attainment is related to schooling, 
we include it in the monetary index alongside other questions pertaining to 
schooling. Mothers answered a detailed module on the home environment, 
which was a cultural adaptation of the short HOME inventory (Caldwell 
and  Bradley 1984) similar to the ­HOME-SF used, for instance, in the 
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979. A number of the HOME ques-
tions were based on interviewer observations (rather than mother reports): 
see online Appendix Section J. School quality was objectively assessed by 
visiting the child at school and recording information on school amenities 
(­playground, computers, library, etc.), number of teachers and classrooms, 
and classroom amenities.
	 (iii)	 ­Time-intensive parental investments included the frequency that the 
mother and father played with the index child, whether someone helped 
with his or her studies, as well as enrichment, family companionship, and 
­family ­integration ­subscales of HOME (all measures are directed at the  
index child).
	 (iv)	 Parenting style captured parenting behavior that did not have explicit time 
or monetary costs. For example, how the mother spoke to the child, or the 
style of discipline she used. It was measured using the Parenting Practices 
Inventory (PPI) (­Webster-Stratton, Reid, and Hammond 2001), capturing the 
disciplinary style of the parents such as the extent of harsh or inconsistent 
disciplining; and the responsivity, encouragement of maturity, and emotional 
climate ­subscales of the HOME score.
	 (v)	 Fertility trajectory was assessed between the beginning of the interven-
tion and the ­7-year ­follow-up. At the ­1-year ­follow-up, mothers were asked 
7 Short-term effects (at 6 months) on control over spending were documented in Rahman et al. (2012) when the 
intervention was still ongoing.


--- PAGE 13 ---
836
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2020
if they were pregnant. At the ­7-year ­follow-up, mothers completed a child 
roster, with ages (but not genders) of children. From this we can infer how 
many surviving children the mother had since the intervention began. First, 
to ­summarize results in a style consistent with other outcomes, we create an 
index with the total number of siblings of the index child (the child in womb 
at the start of the intervention) born since treatment started, whether the 
mother was pregnant again at the ­1-year ­follow-up, whether the index child 
is the last child, and the ideal number of children (asked only at the ­7-year 
­follow-up). Second, based on the child roster data reported by the mother at 
the ­7-year ­follow-up, we also plot the fertility trajectory as a function of time 
since treatment.
Child Outcomes.—We report results for four groups of child outcomes at the 
­7-year ­follow-up, referring to the physical, cognitive, ­socio-emotional develop-
ment of the index child, and the survival of siblings. For infancy we had the length 
and weight of the child, diarrheal episodes, and acute respiratory infections; these 
results are in online Appendix Table H.45. Although the women had other chil-
dren who could have been affected by the intervention, most outcomes ­analyzed 
are for the index child, i.e., the child in the womb at the start of the intervention. 
Similarly, most of the questions about parenting refer specifically to the index child. 
Some items of the HOME inventory, such as the physical environment subscale 
measured the overall quality of the household environment, such as ­cleanliness 
and safety.
	
(i)	 Physical development was measured using growth, fine motor skills, and 
illness. Interviewers measured height and weight, and motor skills were 
assessed using the Grooved Pegboard Test. Mothers reported any severe 
­illness, hospitalizations, and eye and hearing problems of the child.
	 (ii)	 Cognitive development was assessed with the Wechsler Preschool and 
Primary Scale of Intelligence, designed for children 2.­5–7.5 years old 
(­WPPSI-IV). It provides primary index scales for verbal comprehension, 
­visual-spatial, fluid reasoning, working memory, and processing speed. 
Executive functioning was assessed using a ­Stroop-like test, which gauges 
inhibition and working memory. Basic literacy and numeracy tests were 
administered by us, providing math and Urdu scores based on the number of 
correct answers out of 16 and 12 questions respectively. The school grade of 
the child was based on teacher reports.
	 (iii)	 ­Socio-emotional development was measured along two broad domains: 
behavioral and emotional problems, assessed with the Strengths and 
Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) (Goodman 1997); and anxiety, assessed 
with the Spence Children’s Anxiety Scale (SCAS) (Spence 1998). Both 
­measures were based on questions answered by the mother.
	 (iv)	 Sibling survival. Survival of the index child’s siblings is the only ­sibling 
­outcome we are able to evaluate. We use the mother’s reports of child 


--- PAGE 14 ---
837
BARANOV ET AL.: MATERNAL DEPRESSION AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
VOL. 110 NO. 3
­mortality since the intervention, and the sex ratio of surviving children at the 
­7-year ­follow-up to assess treatment effects.8
IV.  Econometric Specification
Since treatment assignment was random, our principal estimating equation is
(1)	
​​Y​ic​  =  α + β ​T​c​ + Γ′ ​X​ic​ + ​ε​ic​​ ,
where ​​Y​ic​​ is the outcome for the mother or child ​i​ living in cluster ​c​. As discussed, 
we create outcome indices. These are standardized within the control group to have 
mean 0 and standard deviation 1, and positive values are always associated with 
more favorable outcomes.
The variable ​​T​c​​ is a dummy equal to 1 if the mother is in the intervention group, 
which by the cluster design varies only at the Union Council level, ​c​. The term ​​X​ic​​ 
is a vector of ­controls. We first show a parsimonious model controlling only for 
interview date and interviewer fixed effects. We then include the full set of base-
line characteristics, demeaned and interacted with the treatment indicator. This 
accounts for the fact that the ­follow-up sample was not balanced along all observ-
able baseline characteristics, and the interaction with treatment allows for differing 
impacts of these characteristics on outcomes. The characteristics include the moth-
er’s age and its square, parity, family structure, presence of grandmother (mother 
or ­mother-in-law of depressed mother), the mother’s education, father’s education, 
if the mother was employed, if the mother was empowered, wealth index, depres-
sion severity (Hamilton score), and the Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social 
Support (MSPSS). Our results are not sensitive to adding controls.9
We report standard errors clustered at the unit of randomization. However,  
​p​-values are computed using randomization inference, adjusting for multiple hypoth-
esis testing and with randomization permuted at the cluster level (Young 2019).
The parameter of interest, ​β​, represents the ­intention-to-treat (ITT) effect. Since 
attrition was not different by treatment status, treatment was not available to control 
mothers, and all women offered the treatment accepted it, ​β​ would be the average 
treatment effect on the treated (ATT) if we could assume that all treated women 
participated in all sessions. Although we had full compliance we do not observe how 
many sessions the women actually received.
We identify the causal effect of the CBT intervention treating depression rather 
than the causal effect of depression. Not all mothers recovered from depression in 
the treatment arm, and many mothers in the control arm spontaneously recovered. 
We do not use the randomized assignment as an instrument for depression, since it is 
possible that the intervention may have had direct impacts on some outcomes above 
8 While attrition due to mortality was scrupulously reported between baseline and ­1-year, between the ­1-year 
and ­7-year ­follow-up child survival was not reported for study participants who moved or refused at any time, and 
only a few instances of child deaths were specifically reported.
9 Child age is not in the controls as it is potentially endogenous and the range is limited, the children being 
of a single birth cohort born ­2005–2006. However, treatment did not affect the age of the child (by lengthening 
­pregnancy, for example), and the results are nearly identical if we control for age.


--- PAGE 15 ---
838
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2020
and beyond affecting maternal depression, through encouraging healthy thinking 
and bonding with the child.
Multiple Inference and Power.—As we gathered numerous indicators within 
each  domain, following O’Brien (1984); Kling, Liebman, and  Katz (2007); and 
Anderson (2008), we construct summary indices as the most efficient weighted aver-
age of a set of outcomes.10 This addresses the problem of multiple inference by reduc-
ing the number of hypotheses tested and also improves the power of our statistical 
tests for whether the intervention had effects for groups of related outcomes.
We further account for multiple hypothesis testing across the indices by 
­calculating ​p​-values using a ­step-down procedure with a ­nonparametric 
­permutation  test which controls the ­family-wise error rate (FWER), following 
Westfall and Young (1993) and Efron and Tibshirani (1994). The ​p​-values used in 
this procedure use the ​p​-values generated by randomization inference (Young 2019).
Power calculations for the ­7-year ­follow-up were structured around the ­WPPSI-III 
­full-scale IQ measure for children. Calculations were based on ­reenrollment ­numbers 
that were slightly optimistic with N of 328 in the intervention arm (actual 289) and 
314 in the control arm (actual 296) and an ­inter-cluster correlation (ICC) of 0.05. 
The ICC was based on the observed ICC in the same clusters for the maternal mental 
health variables in the original study (Rahman et al. 2008). With these parameters, 
the study had 80 percent power to detect a difference of 0.36 standard deviations in 
standardized scores.
Heterogeneous Treatment Effects.—We report heterogeneous treatment effects, 
estimated separately for each gender of the index child, since in South Asia son prefer-
ence leads to investments and outcomes often favoring sons (Sathar et al. 2015; Miller 
1981; Bhalotra, Chakravarty, and Gulesci 2020) and mothers of sons (Milazzo 2018, 
Bhalotra et al. 2018). Additionally, males are biologically more sensitive to stress in 
utero (Trivers and Willard 1973), and male and female children respond differently to 
early life shocks (Autor et al. 2016, Bhalotra and Venkataramani 2011). Additionally, 
we test for treatment effect heterogeneity by ­socioeconomic status, demographic 
­indicators, and baseline depression severity (see online Appendix Section G).
V.  Results
We find persistent benefits of the intervention on women’s mental health at the 
­7-year mark. We also identify meaningful and statistically significant intervention 
impacts on the mother’s control over household resources and parental investments 
in children (including parenting style for girls). Yet we find no detectable average 
10 The index weights outcomes using the inverse of their ­variance-covariance matrix. This procedure is akin to 
estimating a seemingly unrelated regression model of all (standardized) outcomes on the treatment indicator jointly, 
while constraining the coefficients to be equal within each grouping. As this is a generalized least squares (GLS) 
estimator it provides the most efficient estimation of the treatment effect across related outcomes. As an alternative, 
we compute factor scores, a method more suited when the measures are proxies of an underlying ­one-dimensional 
latent factor, measured with noise. The results (online Appendix Table E.14) are qualitatively similar. The factor 
score drops individuals with any missing data, whereas the ­GLS-weighted index allows for item ­nonresponse, 
weighting outcomes more where more data are available.


--- PAGE 16 ---
839
BARANOV ET AL.: MATERNAL DEPRESSION AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
VOL. 110 NO. 3
effects on fertility, and only small and imprecisely estimated effects across multiple 
domains of child development.
Our main results are presented in Figure 2 and in Tables 2, 3, 4, and 6. The tables 
display treatment effects with parsimonious and enriched controls and report the 
randomization inference ­p-values from the richer model, adjusted to control for the 
FWER (FWER adjustment is not performed in Table 2 since we test the effect of the 
intervention on only one construct, clinical depression, which is the main target of 
the intervention). We also report treatment effects estimated separately for each gen-
der of the index child. Our findings are robust to numerous sensitivity checks (online 
Appendix Section E), and generally survive both parametric and ­nonparametric cor-
rections for attrition, reported in Table 8.
A. Depression Trajectories
The CBT intervention was highly successful in reducing depression, not only at 
­6 months and ­1 year, as shown by Rahman et al. (2008), but also 7 years after the 
intervention concluded. Figure 3 shows the rapid recovery in the treatment arm, with 
depression rates stabilizing around 25 percent after just 6 months. By contrast, the 
Figure 2. Intervention Effects on Main Outcomes, Pooled, and By Gender
Notes: Figure shows the estimated intervention effects in standard deviations, pooled and separately by gender 
(reported in Tables ­2–9), along with 99 percent and 95 percent confidence intervals calculated using randomization 
inference (Young 2019). Details of the estimation procedure appear in Section IV and tables notes.
Depression severity
Mother's financial empowerment
Parental investment (monetary)
Parental investment (time-intensive)
Parenting style
Fertility
Physical development
Cognitive development
Socio-emotional development
Sibling survival index
Mother's mental health
Mother's decision-making
Child outcomes
−0.5
−0.25
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
Effect size in standard deviations of the control group
Full sample
Female
Male


--- PAGE 17 ---
840
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2020
recovery rate in the control arm was much more gradual, with 58 percent of mothers 
in the control group suffering from depression after 1 year postpartum. This sponta-
neous recovery in the control group, or ­mean-reversion, is consistent with the litera-
ture showing that major depression episodes subside over time even without treatment 
(Cuijpers et al. 2014, Fisher et al. 2012, Gelaye et al. 2016). Nevertheless, even after 
7 years, recovery rates in the control group did not catch up with treatment: the rate 
of depression among women in the control arm was ​30 percent (n  =  90 / 296)​, com-
pared to ​24 percent (n  =  69 / 289)​ in the intervention arm.
Table  2 reports the ­regression-adjusted estimates of the treatment effects on 
depression and its severity. At the ­7-year ­follow-up, women in the treated arm were 
5 percentage points less likely to be clinically depressed ​( p  =  0.076)​ and experi-
enced a 0.18 SD reduction in depression severity ​( p  =  0.004)​ relative to control 
women (column 3). This ­longer-run reduction in severity is about ­one-third of the 
Table 2—Trajectory of Maternal Mental Health
Intervention effects: full sample
Control 
group mean
β (SE)
Adjusted 
β (SE)
RI ­p-value
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
At the ­6-month follow-up
  Depressed
​0.52​
​− 0.32​
​− 0.32​
​0.000​
​​(0.50)​​
​​(0.05)​​
​​(0.04)​​
  Depression severity
​0.00​
​− 0.62​
​− 0.60​
​0.000​
​​(1.00)​​
​​(0.10)​​
​​(0.08)​​
At the ­1-year follow-up
  Depressed
​0.58​
​− 0.32​
​− 0.30​
​0.000​
​​(0.49)​​
​​(0.04)​​
​​(0.05)​​
  Depression severity
​0.00​
​− 0.70​
​− 0.66​
​0.000​
​​(1.00)​​
​​(0.09)​​
​​(0.09)​​
At the ­7-year follow-up
  Depressed
​0.30​
​− 0.06​
​− 0.05​
​0.076​
​​(0.46)​​
​​(0.03)​​
​​(0.03)​​
  Depression severity
​− 0.00​
​− 0.22​
​− 0.18​
​0.004​
​​(1.00)​​
​​(0.06)​​
​​(0.06)​​
Recovery trajectory
  Recovered permanently
​0.34​
​0.25​
​0.23​
​0.000​
​​(0.47)​​
​​(0.04)​​
​​(0.04)​​
  Never recovered
​0.23​
​− 0.14​
​− 0.12​
​0.000​
​​(0.42)​​
​​(0.03)​​
​​(0.03)​​
Notes: Observations = 585. Depression severity is an index of all depression measures avail-
able in the data at each time point (see online Appendix Section J and Table B.2 for detailed 
definitions). Never recovered is defined as being clinically diagnosed with depression at both 
­follow-ups after the therapy ended (­1-year and ­7-year). Recovered permanently is defined as 
being assessed as not clinically depressed at both ­post-therapy ­follow-ups. Standard errors, 
clustered at the level of randomization, in parentheses. Column 4 reports randomization infer-
ence ­p-values, clustered at the level of randomization (Young 2019). All models control for 
interview date and interviewer. Specifications with all controls additionally adjust for baseline 
characteristics (all centered and interacted with the treatment indicator). The set of baseline 
characteristics include mother’s age and its square, parity, family structure, presence of grand-
mother (mother or ­mother-in-law of depressed mother), mother’s education, father’s education, 
if mother was employed, if mother was empowered, ­PCA-weighted wealth index, depression 
severity (Hamilton score), and perceived social support (MSPSS). ­Attrition-adjusted estimates 
are presented in Table 8. 


--- PAGE 18 ---
841
BARANOV ET AL.: MATERNAL DEPRESSION AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
VOL. 110 NO. 3
reduction in depression severity identified in the ­short run (0.­6–0.7 SD). Importantly, 
the diminishing treatment effect over time does not arise because treated women 
relapse, but rather due to the spontaneous recovery of the control women.
The quick and stable recovery brought about by CBT is remarkable. As can be 
seen in the last panel of Table 2, women in the treatment arm were 23 ­percentage 
points more likely to be not depressed at both ­post-CBT ­follow-ups, a sign of 
permanent recovery, and 12 percentage points less likely to have never recovered 
(depressed at both 1- and ­7-year ­follow-ups). The latter result is important as it 
­indicates that intervention was effective against chronic depression.
Treatment effects on depression, particularly in the ­longer run, were signifi-
cantly larger for mothers of girls with an estimated reduction in depression rate of 
10 ­percentage points (Table 3). Interestingly, at 6 months postpartum, treatment 
­benefited mothers of boys slightly more, but by 1 year postpartum, the treatment 
effect was 8 percentage points larger for mothers of girls. The benefits of treatment 
thus shifted over time toward mothers of girls. In particular, treatment was more 
likely to reduce chronic depression in mothers of girls versus boys (by 16 percent-
age points, p  =  0.002).
While the longer-term effects on depression are not sensitive to attrition correc-
tion using inverse probability weighting, they are somewhat sensitive to attrition 
bounds, especially when bounds are calculated by grouping the mothers of girls 
and boys together (Table 8). Separately estimating the bounds by child gender, the 
95 percent confidence interval for the treatment effect on depression at the ­7-year 
mark for mothers of girls ranges from −0.22 to 0.03.
In order to interpret the results on women’s ­decision-making that follow, we note 
that the total effect on women’s depression stemming from the intervention is the 
Figure 3. Treatment Effects on Depression
Notes: Figure shows the share of women clinically diagnosed with major depression at each ­follow-up wave by 
trial arm. Ninety-five percent confidence intervals are based on conventional standard errors of the raw (unadjusted) 
means.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Share depressed
Baseline
6-month
1-year
7-year
Control
Treatment
Non-depressed
95% CI


--- PAGE 19 ---
842
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2020
cumulative difference in depression throughout all these years (rather than just the 
difference in prevalence at the ­7-year mark).
B. Women’s ­Decision-Making
The CBT intervention significantly increased the mother’s financial empower-
ment by 0.29 SD, monetary parental investments by 0.28 SD, and ­time-intensive 
parental investments by 0.20 SD, as summarized in Figure 2 and shown in Table 4.11 
On average, we find no effects on parenting style or fertility, with very small esti-
mated treatment effects of 0.05 SD and 0.00 SD respectively.
Treatment effects are driven by mothers who were pregnant with a girl at the start 
of the intervention. This is reassuring since baseline characteristics and patterns of 
11 We have used data from every ­follow-up to construct the indices of maternal financial empowerment and 
fertility. Rahman et al. (2012) reported the impact of the same intervention on the mother’s control over spending 
while the intervention was ongoing (at 6 months). Repeating the analysis using only the outcomes measured at 7 
years, the magnitude of the effect on financial empowerment falls from 0.29 to 0.18 SD, and the effect for fertility 
goes from 0.01 to 0.03, but the results are qualitatively similar (online Appendix Tables E.15 and H.34).
Table 3—Divergent Trajectories of Maternal Mental Health by Child Gender
Intervention effects: by child gender
Girl control mean
Boy control mean
βGirl(SE)
βBoy(SE)
βGirl = βBoy
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
At the ­6-month follow-up
  Depressed
​0.48​
​0.56​
​− 0.29​
​− 0.37​
​0.287​
​​(0.05)​​
​​(0.07)​​
  Depression severity
​− 0.08​
​0.07​
​− 0.51​
​− 0.75​
​0.097​
​​(0.10)​​
​​(0.12)​​
At the ­1-year follow-up
  Depressed
​0.58​
​0.58​
​− 0.36​
​− 0.28​
​0.171​
​​(0.06)​​
​​(0.05)​​
  Depression severity
​− 0.01​
​0.01​
​− 0.73​
​− 0.63​
​0.402​
​​(0.12)​​
​​(0.10)​​
At the ­7-year follow-up
  Depressed
​0.33​
​0.28​
​− 0.10​
​0.05​
​0.011​
​​(0.04)​​
​​(0.04)​​
  Depression severity
​− 0.01​
​0.01​
​− 0.25​
​− 0.10​
​0.229​
​​(0.09)​​
​​(0.09)​​
Recovery trajectory
  Recovered permanently
​0.34​
​0.34​
​0.28​
​0.21​
​0.224​
​​(0.06)​​
​​(0.04)​​
  Never recovered
​0.26​
​0.20​
​− 0.18​
​− 0.02​
​0.002​
​​(0.04)​​
​​(0.04)​​
Notes: Observations  =  585. Depression severity is an index of all depression measures available in the data at 
each time point (see online Appendix Section J and Table B.2 for detailed definitions). Never recovered is defined 
as being clinically diagnosed with depression at both ­follow-ups after the therapy ended (­1-year and ­7-year). 
Recovered permanently is defined as being assessed as not clinically depressed at both ­post-therapy ­follow-ups. 
Columns 3 and 4 report treatment effects separately by gender of the index child (controlling for all baseline char-
acteristics described in Table 2).  Standard errors, clustered at the level of randomization, in parentheses. Column 
5 reports the test of equality in treatment effects between the two samples. ­Attrition-adjusted treatment effect esti-
mates by child gender are reported in online Appendix Table D.12.


--- PAGE 20 ---
843
BARANOV ET AL.: MATERNAL DEPRESSION AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
VOL. 110 NO. 3
attrition were more balanced in the subsample of mothers with girls. The estimates 
for mothers of boys are consistently smaller and often indistinguishable from zero. 
This is true both for the indices and their individual components. Mothers of girls 
saw a 0.46 SD increase in financial empowerment, a 0.47 SD increase in monetary 
investments, and a 0.21 SD improvement in parenting style. All of these effects 
are statistically stronger for mothers of girls than mothers of boys. ­Time-intensive 
investments in girls increased by 0.26 SD, twice as much as for boys, but in this case 
the gender difference is not significant.
That the mother’s gaining greater control over household resources goes hand in 
hand with greater investments in children is consistent with previous research, for 
example Lundberg, Pollak, and Wales (1997). This result is reinforced by the fact 
that increases in financial empowerment and in parental investments were larger for 
mothers of girls. Notice that this gender difference in effects does not necessarily 
require that mothers had stronger preferences for girls or for equality between boys 
and girls, although this may have contributed.12
To put the magnitudes of the estimated treatment effects into context, Table 5 
reports the mean differences in outcomes between control arm women who were 
12 We considered whether differential effects by gender might reflect selective processes of ­gender-differentiated 
abortion or fertility over time, resulting in treated girls being more “wanted.” However, ­sex-selective abortion is 
very unlikely as prenatal sex detection diagnostics were unavailable to this population (Zaidi and Morgan 2016), 
Muslims appear not to conduct female feticide (Almond, Edlund, and Milligan, 2013; Bhalotra, ­Clots-Figueras, 
and Iyer 2017), and we find no significant evidence of gender differences in survival (Table 1) or fertility (online 
Appendix Table H.33.)
Table 4—Intervention Effects on Mother’s ­Decision-Making
Full sample
By child gender
β/(SE)
Adjusted 
β/(SE)
FWER 
­p-value spec (2)
βGirl (SE)
βBoy (SE)
βGirl = βBoy 
­p-value 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Mother’s financial
​0.29​
​0.29​
​0.019​
​0.46​
​0.13​
​0.031​
  empowerment
​​(0.11)​​
​​(0.09)​​
​​(0.12)​​
​​(0.12)​​
Parental investment
​0.35​
​0.28​
​0.012​
​0.47​
​0.08​
​0.003​
  (monetary)
​​(0.07)​​
​​(0.06)​​
​​(0.11)​​
​​(0.09)​​
Parental investment
​0.20​
​0.20​
​0.028​
​0.26​
​0.13​
​0.280​
  (­time-intensive)
​​(0.07)​​
​​(0.06)​​
​​(0.09)​​
​​(0.08)​​
Parenting style
​0.04​
​0.05​
​0.807​
​0.21​
​− 0.20​
​0.001​
​​(0.08)​​
​​(0.08)​​
​​(0.09)​​
​​(0.13)​​
Fertility trajectory
​0.01​
​− 0.00​
​0.989​
​0.12​
​− 0.14​
​0.092​
​​(0.10)​​
​​(0.09)​​
​​(0.11)​​
​​(0.15)​​
Notes: Observations = 585. Summary indices are normalized to be mean 0 and SD 1 in the control group, with 
positive values associated with more favorable outcomes. Index construction is described in the text (Section IIIA). 
Standard errors, clustered at the level of randomization, in parentheses. All models control for interview date and 
interviewer. Specifications with all controls additionally adjust for baseline characteristics (all centered and inter-
acted with the treatment indicator). The set of baseline characteristics include mother’s age and its square, parity, 
family structure, presence of grandmother (mother or ­mother-in-law of depressed mother), mother’s education, 
father’s education, if mother was employed, if mother was empowered, ­PCA-weighted wealth index, depression 
severity (Hamilton score), and perceived social support (MSPSS). Inference is conducted using randomization 
inference ­p-values, clustered at the level of randomization (Young 2019). RI ­p-values are adjusted to control for the 
­family-wise error rate (FWER), calculated using a free ­step-down resampling method (Westfall and Young 1993). 
Columns 4 and 5 report treatment effects by gender of the index child (controlling for all baseline characteristics) 
and column 6 reports the test of equality in treatment effects between the two samples.


--- PAGE 21 ---
844
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2020
depressed at baseline and the women who were not depressed at baseline. The 
­magnitudes of the estimated treatment effects are very similar to these descrip-
tive differences, which represent the association between perinatal depression and 
outcomes 7 years later in the absence of treatment, which we call the “depression 
gap.” These gaps show significantly lower financial empowerment for the perina-
tally depressed woman, lower fertility, and lower time and monetary investments 
in children 7 years later. Parenting style does not seem to be strongly associated 
with depression. Gender differences in these gaps are slightly larger for girls, except 
for ­time-intensive investments, but none of these gender differences are statistically 
significant. CBT closed or considerably narrowed these depression gaps, bringing 
­medium-term outcomes of perinatally depressed women close to those of their 
­nondepressed counterparts.
The magnitude of the estimated treatment effects can also be compared to the 
gender gap in the control group means (online Appendix Table E.19). Gender gaps 
in the control group are either small, as in the case of parenting style and time inten-
sive investments, or in favor of boys. The intervention acted to narrow or close the 
gender gap for the mother’s empowerment and monetary investment, while it did 
not close the gender gap in fertility.
To better understand these results, we look at treatment effects for each compo-
nent of these indices (online Appendix Tables H.29–H.33). For financial empower-
ment, we find consistent improvements in treated women getting higher control over 
spending (about 10 percentage points at ­6-month, ­1-year, and ­7-year ­follow-ups). 
Treatment effects are greater for mothers of girls, even in the short run, but the 
­difference is statistically significant only at the ­7-year mark, mirroring the results on 
mothers’ depression trajectories. Women were also more likely to be working, but 
Table 5—Depression Gap in Mother’s Outcomes
Depressed controls − ­nondepressed
Pooled
Girls
Boys
­p-value
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Depression index (7y)
​0.54​
​0.51​
​0.57​
​0.64​
​​(0.07)​​
​​(0.10)​​
​​(0.09)​​
Mother’s financial empowerment (7y)
​− 0.31​
​− 0.45​
​− 0.18​
​0.12​
​​(0.08)​​
​​(0.12)​​
​​(0.12)​​
Parental investment (monetary)
​− 0.32​
​− 0.35​
​− 0.29​
​0.72​
​​(0.08)​​
​​(0.13)​​
​​(0.11)​​
Parental investment (­time-intensive)
​− 0.39​
​− 0.25​
​− 0.51​
​0.12​
​​(0.08)​​
​​(0.12)​​
​​(0.11)​​
Parenting style
​− 0.09​
​− 0.16​
​− 0.04​
​0.46​
​​(0.08)​​
​​(0.12)​​
​​(0.11)​​
Number of kids born past 7 years
​− 0.24​
​− 0.26​
​− 0.23​
​0.82​
​​(0.08)​​
​​(0.13)​​
​​(0.11)​​
Notes: Table  reports raw difference in means between prenatally ­nondepressed mothers 
(observations = 300) and prenatally depressed controls (observations = 296) for key outcome 
indices and variables at the ­7-year ­follow-up. Since prenatally ­nondepressed mothers were 
interviewed only at the ­7-year ­follow-up, maternal financial empowerment index does not con-
tain mother controls spending (6m) and mother gets pocket money (12m), and only the num-
ber of kids born in the past 7 years are reported in lieu of the fertility index. Columns 2 and 3 
report the depression gap by child gender, column 4 reports the ­p-value of the test that the gap 
differs by child gender.


--- PAGE 22 ---
845
BARANOV ET AL.: MATERNAL DEPRESSION AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
VOL. 110 NO. 3
this is imprecisely estimated in part because of very low labor force participation 
among women (only 10 percent of control women work).
For monetary parental investment, treatment induced a higher probability of send-
ing children to private schools (12 percentage points) and better quality schools 
(0.22 SD), as well as higher educational expectations (­one-third of a grade) and better 
learning materials in the home (0.21 SD). For ­time-intensive parental investments, the 
intervention improved by about 0.20 SD all of the subscales of the HOME inventory 
which indicate enrichment, family companionship, and family integration, as well as 
the probability that someone helped with studies (6 percentage points). For parenting 
style, none of the individual components of the index were robustly improved by the 
treatment: we find only a marginal improvement in the emotional climate, responsiv-
ity, and not being harsh, especially for girls. For fertility, we find a precise null effect: 
none of the individual outcomes were shifted by the intervention, and no differences in 
number or timing of subsequent births (online Appendix Figures I.1 and I.2).
Unpacking the indices further reveals significant changes in both ­mother-reported 
and interviewer-assessed measures (such as school quality, presence of learning 
materials in the home), suggesting that our findings are not driven by experimenter 
demand effects.
C. Child Outcomes
The estimated effects of the intervention on indicators of child development in 
the cognitive, ­socio-emotional, or physical domains at the ­7-year ­follow-up are 
small and noisily estimated. Effects for sibling survival are slightly larger, but not 
significantly different from zero once adjusting for multiple hypothesis testing. This 
supports the conclusions of Maselko et al. (2015), who estimate the impact of this 
program on a subset of the child development outcomes that we consider.13 Besides 
broadening the set of child outcomes, we created indices with more statistical power 
and conducted additional robustness checks. Still, larger samples will be necessary 
to detect effects of reasonable magnitudes.
Estimated average effects on child development range from −0.08 to 0.14 SD, 
as shown in Table  6. We are able to reject effects bigger than 0.19 SD in 
­socio-emotional, 0.33 SD in cognitive, and 0.40 SD in physical development, as 
shown by the ­attrition-corrected upper 95 percent confidence intervals in Table 8. 
We explore whether treatment effect heterogeneity may be masked in the average 
effects, but find little evidence to suggest that is the case. Quantile treatment effects 
are not significantly different from zero in any part of the distribution, though treat-
ment effects on physical development show larger effects in the lower ­two-thirds of 
the distribution (online Appendix Figure I.4). There is no evidence of substantial 
positive treatment effects in any of the ­subpopulations identified by child gender, 
mother’s education, ­mother’s age, ­parity, wealth, and presence of grandmother at 
baseline (online Appendix Table G.24).
For completeness, we analyze treatment effects on ­subcomponents of each 
child development index (online Appendix Tables H.35–H.38). Even at this more 
13 They analyze only anthropometrics, verbal and visual WPPSI, SDQ, and SCAS. See online Appendix 
Table B.4 for more details.


--- PAGE 23 ---
846
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2020
granular level, we find that the only few positive effects on specific indicators are 
­concentrated among girls, especially in the domains of physical and cognitive 
­development. For example, of the eight measures of physical development, all 
­average effects are smaller than 0.06 SD, sometimes negative. Differentiated by 
gender, only ­BMI-for-age shows a treatment effect bigger than 0.15 SD, positive for 
girls but negative for boys. Of the nine components of cognitive development, only 
processing speed (+2.52 points or 0.25 SD) and fluid reasoning (+1.45 points or 
0.11 SD) improve in the whole treated group by more than one IQ point, and these 
results are driven by girls. Of the 11 components of ­socio-emotional development, 
only 2 increase more than 0.15 SD: treated girls display fewer conduct problems 
but higher ­obsessive-compulsive subscale scores. The sibling survival index is 0.17 
standard deviations larger in the treated group, and this is driven by improved sur-
vival of sisters. Survival of the index child does not seem to be impacted by the 
treatment, so these results indicate sibling spillovers.14
Overall, we are underpowered to detect reasonable effect sizes on child devel-
opment at this age in our sample. So as to benchmark potential treatment effects, 
we perform two calculations. First, we compare child development indicators for 
women who were not prenatally depressed with those for prenatally depressed 
women in the control group (Table 7). Perinatal depression is descriptively associ-
ated with worse children outcomes in the ­7-year ­follow-up, although for cognitive 
14 Appendix Table A1 reports differences in known death rates for attritors between treatment and control 
groups. Overall, 10 percent of the index children died or were severely ill after birth (explaining 28 percent of 
­attrition), a lower mortality rate than the Punjab region. Of known child deaths, rates were not different by treatment 
status.
Table 6—Intervention Effects on Child Outcomes at Age Seven
Full sample
By child gender
β/(SE)
Adjusted 
β/(SE)
FWER
­p-value spec (2)
βGirl (SE)
βBoy (SE)
βGirl = βBoy 
­p-value 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Physical development
​0.15​
​0.14​
​0.435​
​0.20​
​0.07​
​0.358​
​​(0.09)​​
​​(0.09)​​
​​(0.13)​​
​​(0.12)​​
Cognitive development
​0.09​
​0.04​
​0.652​
​0.13​
​− 0.09​
​0.092​
​​(0.08)​​
​​(0.08)​​
​​(0.11)​​
​​(0.11)​​
­Socio-emotional development
​− 0.11​
​− 0.08​
​0.456​
​− 0.08​
​− 0.10​
​0.896​
​​(0.07)​​
​​(0.07)​​
​​(0.09)​​
​​(0.12)​​
Sibling survival index
​0.19​
​0.17​
​0.260​
​0.28​
​− 0.01​
​0.019​
​​(0.08)​​
​​(0.08)​​
​​(0.10)​​
​​(0.11)​​
Notes: Observations = 585. Summary indices are normalized to be mean 0 and SD 1 in the control group, with 
positive values associated with more favorable outcomes. Index construction is described in the text (Section IIIA). 
Standard errors, clustered at the level of randomization, in parentheses. All models control for interview date and 
interviewer. Specifications with all controls additionally adjust for baseline characteristics (all centered and inter-
acted with the treatment indicator). The set of baseline characteristics include mother’s age and its square, parity, 
family structure, presence of grandmother (mother or ­mother-in-law of depressed mother), mother’s education, 
father’s education, if mother was employed, if mother was empowered, ­PCA-weighted wealth index, depression 
severity (Hamilton score), and perceived social support (MSPSS). Inference is conducted using randomization 
inference ­p-values, clustered at the level of randomization (Young 2019). RI ­p-values are adjusted to control for the 
­family-wise error rate (FWER), calculated using a free ­step-down resampling method (Westfall and Young 1993).


--- PAGE 24 ---
847
BARANOV ET AL.: MATERNAL DEPRESSION AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
VOL. 110 NO. 3
development the depression gap is smaller and noisily estimated. Differences in 
physical development appeared for both boys and girls (driven by ­mother-reported 
illness rather than child growth). The depression gap is slightly bigger for girls in 
cognitive development and sibling survival, and for boys in ­socio-emotional devel-
opment, although none of these differences are statistically significant. Second, we 
use the correlational relationship between parental investments and child outcomes 
(shown in online Appendix Table E.16) to calculate the change in child development 
indicators that is to be expected as a consequence of the treatment effect on parental 
investments.15 These expected changes are 0.006 for socio-emotional development, 
0.048 for physical development, and 0.077 for cognitive development; all these 
changes are quite small, and fall within the confidence intervals of our estimated 
effects. We discuss alternative explanations for these small effects on child develop-
ment further in Section VE.
D. Potential Mechanisms
The CBT intervention may have improved the outcomes through several mecha-
nisms. For example, treatment may have led to better physical health among women 
as a result of better mental health (Ferrari et al. 2013), or as a direct result of the 
positive thinking therapy; husbands who reduced working hours in order to take care 
of the depressed wife or aid in child rearing may have been more likely to return 
to work in the treated group; the treatment may have directly engendered a better 
relationship with the husband or other members of the household (as this was part 
of the content of the intervention); or the child’s grandmother might have been more 
likely to have moved in to help care for the mother and the child in the treated group, 
and this might have contributed to the outcomes we document. We delve into these 
mechanisms first by looking at direct effects of the intervention on intermediate 
15 We thank one of the referees for suggesting this calculation. See online Appendix Section E.2 for more 
details.
Table 7—Depression Gap in Child Outcomes
Depressed controls − nondepressed
Pooled
Girls
Boys
­p-value
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Physical development
​− 0.23​
​− 0.21​
​− 0.25​
​0.81​
​​(0.08)​​
​​(0.11)​​
​​(0.11)​​
Cognitive development
​− 0.12​
​− 0.24​
​− 0.01​
​0.17​
​​(0.09)​​
​​(0.12)​​
​​(0.12)​​
­Socio-emotional development
​− 0.17​
​− 0.05​
​− 0.28​
​0.16​
​​(0.08)​​
​​(0.12)​​
​​(0.11)​​
Sibling survival index
​− 0.16​
​− 0.25​
​− 0.07​
​0.22​
​​(0.08)​​
​​(0.12)​​
​​(0.09)​​
Notes: Table reports raw difference in means between children of prenatally ­nondepressed moth-
ers (observations = 300) and prenatally depressed controls (observations = 296) for key out-
come indices and variables at the ­7-year ­follow-up. Columns 2 and 3 report the depression gap 
by child gender, column 4 reports the ­p-value of the test that the gap differs by child gender.


--- PAGE 25 ---
848
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2020
outcomes, and then assessing heterogeneity of treatment effects based on observed 
baseline characteristics.
Intermediate Outcomes.—In order to shed light on which of these mechanisms are 
more plausible, we investigate the effect of the intervention on several ­intermediate 
outcomes between birth and the ­7-year ­follow-up. We generate ­indices for the 
Table 8—­Attrition-Corrected Treatment Effects
Treatment effect β/(SE)
Attrition bounds
Unweighted
IPW
95 percent CI
(1)
(2)
(3)
Mother’s mental health
Depression index (7y)
​− 0.18​
​− 0.19​
[−0.43, ​​​0.19]
​​(0.06)​​
​​(0.06)​​
Depressed (7y)
​− 0.05​
​− 0.05​
[−0.16​​​, ​​​0.08]
​​(0.03)​​
​​(0.03)​​
Never recovered
​− 0.12​
​− 0.13​
[−0.21, ​​​0.01]
​​(0.03)​​
​​(0.03)​​
Recovered permanently
​0.23​
​0.23​
[0.16​​​, ​​​0.41]
​​(0.04)​​
​​(0.04)​​
Mother’s ­decision-making
Mother’s financial empowerment (7y)
​0.18​
​0.18​
[0.06, ​​​0.56]
​​(0.07)​​
​​(0.07)​​
Mother’s financial empowerment
​0.29​
​0.29​
[0.13, ​​​0.65]
​​(0.09)​​
​​(0.09)​​
Parental investment (monetary)
​0.28​
​0.27​
[0.01, ​​​0.68]
​​(0.06)​​
​​(0.06)​​
Parental investment (­time-intensive)
​0.20​
​0.20​
[−0.00​​​ , ​​​0.67]
​​(0.06)​​
​​(0.06)​​
Parenting style
​0.05​
​0.06​
[−0.32​​​, ​​​0.36]
​​(0.08)​​
​​(0.08)​​
Fertility trajectory
​− 0.00​
​0.00​
[−0.35, ​​​0.39]
​​(0.09)​​
​​(0.09)​​
Child development outcomes
Physical development
​0.14​
​0.14​
[−0.26, ​​​0.40]
​​(0.09)​​
​​(0.09)​​
Cognitive development
​0.04​
​0.04​
[−0.33, ​​​0.33]
​​(0.08)​​
​​(0.08)​​
­Socio-emotional development
​− 0.08​
​− 0.07​
[−0.50, ​​​0.19]
​​(0.07)​​
​​(0.07)​​
Sibling survival index
​0.17​
​0.16​
[−0.22, ​​​0.43]
​​(0.08)​​
​​(0.08)​​
Potential mediators
Grandmother present (7y)
​0.06​
​0.07​
[0.01, ​​​0.25]
​​(0.04)​​
​​(0.04)​​
Perceived social support (7y)
​2.85​
​2.73​
[−0.93, ​​​7.52]
​​(0.84)​​
​​(0.86)​​
Notes: Column 1 reproduces the treatment effect estimates without attrition correction. Column 2 shows 
­attrition-corrected treatment effect estimates using IPW (Inverse Probability Weighting). Estimates in ­columns 1 
and 2 control for the full set of baseline characteristics as described in previous tables. Standard errors, ­clustered 
at the level of randomization, in parentheses. Column 3 shows 95  percent confidence intervals for the treat-
ment effect using attrition bounds (Lee 2009, Imbens and  Manski 2004) using the baseline starting sample 
with ​observations = 903​.
