

--- PAGE 1 ---
American Economic Review 2020, 110(2): 364–400 
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20181478
364
Outsourcing Education: 
Experimental Evidence from Liberia†
By Mauricio Romero, Justin Sandefur, and Wayne Aaron Sandholtz*
In 2016, the Liberian government delegated management of 93 
randomly selected public schools to private providers. Providers 
received US$50 per pupil, on top of US$50 per pupil annual expen-
diture in control schools. After one academic year, students in out-
sourced schools scored 0.18​σ​ higher in English and mathematics. We 
do not find heterogeneity in learning gains or enrollment by student 
characteristics, but there is significant heterogeneity across provid-
ers. While outsourcing appears to be a ­cost-effective way to use new 
resources to improve test scores, some providers engaged in unfore-
seen and potentially harmful behavior, complicating any assessment 
of welfare gains. (JEL H41, I21, I28, O15)
Governments often enter into ­public-private partnerships as a means to raise cap-
ital or to leverage the efficiency of the private sector (World Bank 2015b). But con-
tracts are inevitably incomplete, and thus contracting out the provision of public 
services to private providers will have theoretically ambiguous impacts on service 
quality (Hart, Shleifer, and Vishny 1997; Holmström and Milgrom 1991). While pri-
vate contractors may face stronger incentives for cost efficiency than civil servants, 
they may also cut costs through actions that are contractually permissible but not in 
the public interest.
* Romero: Centro de Investigación Económica, ITAM (email: mtromero@itam.mx); Sandefur: Center for 
Global Development (email: jsandefur@cgdev.org); Sandholtz: Department of Economics, UC San Diego (email: 
wasandholtz@ucsd.edu). Esther Duflo was the coeditor for this article. Romero acknowledges financial sup-
port from the Asociación Mexicana de Cultura. Sandefur acknowledges financial support from the Research on 
Improving Systems of Education (RISE) program. Sandholtz acknowledges financial support from the Institute for 
Humane Studies. We are grateful to the Minister of Education, George K. Werner, Deputy Minister Romelle Horton, 
Binta Massaquoi, Nisha Makan, and the Partnership Schools for Liberia (PSL) team, as well as Susannah Hares, 
Robin Horn, and Joe Collins from Ark EPG for their commitment throughout this project to ensuring a rigorous and 
transparent evaluation of the PSL program. Thanks to Arja Dayal, Dackermue Dolo, and their team at Innovations 
for Poverty Action who led the data collection. Avi Ahuja, Miguel Jimenez, Dev Patel, and Benjamin Tan provided 
excellent research assistance. We’re grateful to Michael Kremer, Karthik Muralidharan, and Pauline Rose who pro-
vided detailed comments on the government report of the independent evaluation of the PSL program. The design 
and analysis benefited from comments and suggestions from Maria Atuesta, Prashant Bharadwaj, Jeffrey Clemens, 
Joe Collins, Mitch Downey, Susannah Hares, Robin Horn, Isaac Mbiti, Gordon McCord, Craig McIntosh, Karthik 
Muralidharan, Owen Ozier, Olga Romero, Santiago Saavedra, Diego Vera-Cossio, and seminar participants at the 
Center for Global Development and UC San Diego. A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at 
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1501 as well as the pre-analysis plan. IRB approval was received from 
IPA (protocol 14227) and the University of Liberia (protocol 17-04-39) prior to any data collection. UCSD IRB 
approval (protocol 161605S) was received after the first round of data collection but before any other activities were 
undertaken. The evaluation was supported by the UBS Optimus Foundation and Aestus Trust. The views expressed 
here are ours, and not those of the Ministry of Education of Liberia or our funders. All errors are our own.
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20181478 to visit the article page for additional materials and author  
disclosure statements.


--- PAGE 2 ---
365
ROMERO ET AL.: OUTSOURCING EDUCATION
VOL. 110 NO. 2
In this paper we study the Partnership Schools for Liberia (PSL) program, which 
delegated management of 93 public schools (3.4 percent of all public primary 
schools, serving 8.6 percent of students enrolled in public primary or ­preschool) to 
8 different private organizations. Providers received an additional US$50 per pupil 
as part of the program, on top of the yearly US$50 per-pupil expenditure in control 
schools, and some providers independently raised and spent far more. PSL schools 
also negotiated successfully for more government teachers: they had an average of 1 
teacher per grade, compared to 0.78 teachers per grade in traditional public schools. 
In exchange, providers were responsible for the daily management of the schools. 
These schools were to remain free and ­nonselective (i.e., providers were not allowed 
to charge fees or screen students based on ability or other characteristics). PSL 
school buildings remained under the ownership of the government. Teachers in PSL 
schools were civil servants, drawn from the existing pool of government teachers.
We study the impact of this program by randomly assigning existing public 
schools to be managed by a private provider. We paired schools (based on infrastruc-
ture and geography), then assigned pairs to providers, and subsequently randomly 
assigned treatment within each matched pair. Thus, we are able to estimate both the 
average impact of the PSL program as well as treatment effects across providers. 
Since treatment assignment may change the student composition across schools, we 
sampled students from ­pretreatment enrollment records. We associate each student 
with their “original” school, regardless of what school (if any) they attend in later 
years. The combination of random assignment of treatment at the school level with 
sampling from a fixed and comparable pool of students allows us to provide clean 
estimates of the program’s ­intention-to-treat (ITT) effect on test scores, uncontam-
inated by selection effects.
The ITT effect on student test scores after one year of the program is 0.18​σ​ for 
English and 0.18​σ​ for mathematics. These gains do not reflect teaching to the test, as 
they are also seen in new questions administered only at the end of the school year 
and in questions with a new format. Taking into account that some providers refused 
to work in some schools randomly assigned to them and some students moved 
schools, the treatment effect on the treated (ToT) after one year of the program is 
0.21​σ​ for English test scores and 0.22​σ​ for mathematics.1 We find no evidence of 
heterogeneity by students’ ­socioeconomic status, gender, or grade, suggesting that 
efficiency gains need not come at the expense of equity concerns. There is also no 
evidence that providers engaged in student selection: the probability of remaining in 
a treatment school is unrelated to age, gender, household wealth, or disability.
These gains in test scores reflect a combination of additional inputs and improved 
management. As a lower bound, the program spent an additional US$50 per 
pupil, which was the government’s budget target for PSL and the transfer made 
to ­operators. While some operators spent more than this, others reported spending 
near this amount. When the cost of additional teachers is included, the cost rises to 
approximately US$70 per student, and when the actual cost reported by providers 
1 Consistent with the design of the experiment, we focus on the ITT effect. The ToT is estimated using the 
assigned treatment as an instrument for whether the student is in fact enrolled in a PSL school during the 2016-2017 
academic year. The percentage of students originally assigned to treatment schools who are actually in treatment 
schools at the end of the 2016-2017 school year is 81 percent. The percentage of students assigned to control 
schools who are in treatment schools at the end of the 2016-2017 school year is 0 percent.


--- PAGE 3 ---
366
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
FEBRUARY 2020
for the first year is included, the average increases to US$238 (see Section IA for 
details). The program also increased management quality, as proxied by teacher 
time on task. Teachers in PSL schools were 50 percent more likely to be in school 
during a spot check (a ­20 percentage point increase, from a base of 40 percent) 
and 43 percent more likely to be engaged in instruction during class time (a ­15 
percentage point increase, from a base of 35 percent). Teacher attendance and time 
on task improved for incumbent teachers, which we interpret as evidence of better 
management.
Since each provider was assigned schools in a ­matched-pair design, we are able to 
estimate (internally valid) treatment effects for each provider. While the assignment 
of treatment within matched pairs was random, the assignment of pairs to providers 
was not, resulting in ­nonrandom differences in schools and locations across providers. 
Therefore, the raw treatment effects for each individual provider are internally valid 
but they are not comparable without further assumptions (see Section III for more 
details). In the online Appendix, we also present treatment effects adjusting for base-
line differences and “shrinking” the estimates using a Bayesian hierarchical model, 
with qualitatively similar results. While the ­highest-performing providers generated 
increases in learning of over 0.36​σ​, the ­lowest-performing providers had no impact on 
learning. The group of ­highest-performing providers includes both the highest spender 
and some of the ­lowest-cost organizations. These results suggest that higher spending 
by itself is neither necessary nor sufficient for improving learning outcomes.2
Turning to whether PSL is a good use of scarce funds, we make two comparisons: 
a comparative ­cost-effectiveness calculation comparing PSL to ­business-as-usual 
expansion of Liberia’s public school system, and a ­cost-benefit calculation based 
on the net present value of the Mincerian earnings returns to the education provided 
by PSL. Both calculations require strong assumptions (Dhaliwal et al. 2014), which 
we discuss in Section IV. While some providers incurred larger costs in the first 
year, assuming all providers will eventually reach the budget target of US$50 per 
pupil implies that the program can increase test scores for treated students by 0.44​σ​ 
per US$100 spent. We estimate this yields a positive net present value for the pro-
gram investment after considering the income gains associated with schooling, and 
is more ­cost-effective than additional spending under ­business-as-usual.
However, test score gains and expenditures fail to tell the entire story of the conse-
quences of this ­public-private partnership. Some providers took unforeseen actions 
that may be socially undesirable. While the contract did not allow ­cream-skimming, 
it did not prohibit providers from capping enrollment in oversubscribed schools 
or from shifting underperforming teachers to other schools.3 While most providers 
kept students in oversubscribed schools and retained existing teachers, one provider 
did not. This provider, Bridge International Academies, removed pupils after taking 
2 See Hanushek and Woessmann (2016) for a review on how school resources affect academic achievement.
3 In principle, removing underperforming teachers could be positive for the school system. In practice, dis-
missed teachers ended up either teaching at other public schools or receiving pay without work (as firing public 
teachers was almost impossible). Reshuffling teachers is unlikely to raise average performance in the system as a 
whole, and Liberia already has a tight budget and short supply of teachers (the literacy rate is below 50 percent). 
Similarly, reducing class sizes may be good policy, but shifting students from PSL schools to other schools is 
unsustainable and may lead us to overstate the scalable impact of the program. While the experiment was designed 
to overcome any bias from student reallocation and we can track teacher reallocations, it is not designed to measure 
negative spillovers.


--- PAGE 4 ---
367
ROMERO ET AL.: OUTSOURCING EDUCATION
VOL. 110 NO. 2
control of schools with large class sizes, and removed 74 percent of incumbent 
teachers from its schools.
More worryingly, news media have revealed serious sexual abuse scandals involv-
ing two of the private providers, one of them a ­US-based ­nonprofit that was well 
regarded by the international community. Over the course of multiple years prior to 
the launch of the program and this study, a More than Me employee, who died of 
AIDS in 2016, raped over 30 girls in a More than Me school.4,5 In 2016, the Board 
Chair of the Liberian Youth Network (the previous name for the Youth Movement 
for Collective Action) was found guilty of raping a teenage boy.6 It is possible that 
similar scandals take place in regular schools but that these were uncovered due to 
the heightened scrutiny of the ­public-private partnership. But at a minimum it shows 
that private providers are far from an obvious solution to sexual violence issues in 
public schools.
Some of these issues could arguably have been solved with more complete con-
tracts or better partner selection. The first year was a pilot and a learning year, and 
the government deliberately tried to select “mission aligned” contractors and left the 
contracts quite open. However, some of the providers engaged in the worst behavior 
were considered some of the most promising. These events underscore the challenge 
of ensuring that private providers act in the public interest in a world of incomplete 
contracts. Thus, our results suggest that outsourcing has some promising features, 
but also presents its own set of difficulties.
We make several contributions to both research and policy. Proponents of 
outsourcing in education argue that combining public finance with private man-
agement has the potential to overcome a ­trade-off between efficiency and equity 
(Patrinos, Barrera-Osorio, and Guáqueta 2009). On the efficiency side, private 
schools tend to be better managed than their public counterparts (Bloom et al. 2015, 
Muralidharan and Sundararaman 2015). On the equity side, ­fee-charging private 
schools may increase inequality and induce ­socioeconomic stratification in educa-
tion (Hsieh and Urquiola 2006, Lucas and Mbiti 2012, Zhang 2014). Thus, in theory, 
­publicly-financed but ­privately-managed schools may increase efficiency without 
compromising equity. Most of the empirical evidence to date on outsourcing educa-
tion comes from the United States, where charter schools appear to improve learn-
ing outcomes when held accountable by a strong commissioning body (Cremata 
et al. 2013, Woodworth et al. 2017). However, there is limited evidence on whether 
private administration of public schools can improve learning outcomes in develop-
ing countries, where governments tend to have limited capacity to write complete 
contracts and enforce them. Two noteworthy studies which examine close analogs 
to PSL in the United States are Abdulkadiroˇglu et al. (2016), which studies charter 
takeovers (where traditional public schools are restarted as charter schools, similar 
4 Finlay Young, “Unprotected,” ProPublica, October 11, 2018 (https://features.propublica.org/liberia/
unprotected-more-than-me-katie-meyler-liberia-sexual-exploitation/).	
5 Note that while these incidents occurred prior to the launch of the program, they were revealed in full only 
after the program launched, which enabled More than Me to dramatically expand its operations. The exhaustive 
investigation by Young (ibid.) exposes two wrongs. One is the systematic rape of Liberian children. The other is 
the refusal of More than Me’s leadership to accept responsibility, and their (successful) efforts to conceal the case 
from public scrutiny.
6 Akoi M. Baysah, “Liberia: Police Charge Youth Activist for Sodomy,” The New Republic Liberia, November 
2, 2016 (web.archive.org/web/20161103182507/https://allafrica.com/stories/201611020824.html).	


--- PAGE 5 ---
368
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
FEBRUARY 2020
to our setting) in Boston and New Orleans; and Fryer (2014), which studies the 
implementation of a bundle of best practices from ­high-performing charter schools 
into ­low-performing, traditional public schools in Houston, Texas. In line with our 
results, both studies find increases in test scores. We provide some of the first exper-
imental estimates on contracting out management of existing public schools in a 
developing country.7
An additional contribution is related to our experimental design and the treatment 
effects we are able to identify. Most US studies use admission lotteries to overcome 
endogeneity issues (for a review, see Chabrier, Cohodes, and Oreopoulos 2016; 
Betts and Tang 2014). But oversubscribed charter schools are different (and likely 
better) than undersubscribed ones, truncating the distribution of estimated treatment 
effects (Tuttle, Gleason, and Clark 2012). We provide treatment effects from across 
the distribution of outsourced schools, and across the distribution of students within 
a school. Relatedly, relying on school lotteries implies that the treatment estimates 
capture the joint impact of outsourcing and oversubscribed schools’ providers. We 
provide treatment effects across a list of providers, vetted by the government, and 
show that the provider matters.
Finally, we contribute to the broader literature on outsourcing service delivery. 
Hart, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997) argues that the bigger the adverse consequences of 
­noncontractible quality shading, the stronger the case for governments to provide ser-
vices directly. Empirically, in cases where quality is easy to measure and to enforce, 
such as water services (Galiani, Gertler, and Schargrodsky 2005) or food distribution 
(Banerjee et al. 2019), outsourcing seems to work. Similarly, for primary health care, 
where quality is measurable (e.g., immunization and antenatal care coverage), out-
sourcing improves outcomes in general (Loevinsohn and Harding 2005, Bloom et al. 
2007). In contrast, for services whose quality is difficult to measure, such as prisons 
(Useem and Goldstone 2002; Cabral, Lazzarini, and de Azevedo 2013), outsourcing 
seems to be detrimental. In contrast to primary health care, there is some evidence 
that contracting out advanced care (where quality is harder to measure) increases 
expenditure without increasing quality (Duggan 2004). Some quality aspects of edu-
cation are easy to measure (e.g., enrollment and basic learning metrics), but oth-
ers are harder (e.g., socialization and selection). In our setting, while outsourcing 
management improves most indices of school quality on average, the effect varies 
across providers. In addition, some providers’ actions had negative unintended con-
sequences and may have generated negative spillovers for the broader education sys-
tem, underscoring the importance of robust contracting and monitoring for this type 
of program.
7 For a review on the few existing ­nonexperimental studies, see Aslam, Rawal, and Saeed (2017). A related 
paper to ours (­Barrera-Osorio et al. 2017) increased the supply of schools through a ­public-private partnership 
in Pakistan. However, it is difficult to disentangle the effect of increasing the supply of schools from the effect of 
privately managed but publicly funded schools.


--- PAGE 6 ---
369
ROMERO ET AL.: OUTSOURCING EDUCATION
VOL. 110 NO. 2
I.  Research Design
A. The Program
Context.—The PSL program broke new ground in Liberia by delegating man-
agement of government schools and employees to private providers. Nonetheless, 
private actors, such as NGOs and USAID contractors, are already common in 
government schools. Over the past decade, Liberia’s basic education budget has 
been roughly US$40 million per year (about ­2–3 percent of GDP), while external 
donors contribute about US$30 million. This distinguishes Liberia from most other 
­low-income countries in Africa, which finance the vast bulk of education spend-
ing through domestic tax revenue (UNESCO 2016). The Ministry spends roughly 
80 percent of its budget on teacher salaries (Ministry of Education–Liberia 2017a), 
while almost all the aid money bypasses the Ministry, flowing instead through an 
array of donor contractors and NGO programs covering ­nonsalary expenditures. 
For instance, in 2017 USAID tendered a US$28 million education program to be 
implemented by a US contractor in public schools over a five-year period (USAID 
2017). The net result is that many “public” education services in Liberia, beyond 
teacher salaries, are provided by ­non-state actors. On top of that, more than one-half 
of children enrolled in preschool and primary attend private schools (Ministry of 
Education–Liberia 2016a).
A second broad feature of Liberia’s education system, relevant for the PSL pro-
gram, is its performance: not only are learning levels low, but access to basic educa-
tion and progression through school remains inadequate. The Minister of Education 
has cited the perception that “Liberia’s education system is in crisis” as the core 
justification for the PSL program.8 While the world has made great progress toward 
universal primary education in the past three decades (worldwide net enrollment 
was almost 90 percent in 2015), Liberia has been left behind. Net primary enroll-
ment stood at only 38 percent in 2014 (World Bank 2014). Low net enrollment is 
partially explained by an extraordinary backlog of ­over-age children due to the civil 
war (see online Appendix Figure A.1): the median student in early childhood edu-
cation is 8 years old and over 60 percent of 15-year-olds are still enrolled in early 
childhood or primary education (Liberia Institute of Statistics and ­Geo-Information 
Services 2016). Learning levels are low: only 25 percent of adult women (there is 
no information for men) who finish elementary school can read a complete sentence 
(Liberia Institute of Statistics and ­Geo-Information Services 2014).
Intervention.—The Partnership Schools for Liberia (PSL) program is a 
­public-private partnership (PPP) for school management. The Government of 
Liberia contracted multiple ­nonstate providers to run ­93 existing public primary 
and ­pre-primary schools. There are nine grades per school: three early childhood 
education grades (Nursery, K1, and K2) and six primary grades (grade 1 to grade 6). 
8 George K. Werner, “Liberia Has to Work with International Private School Companies If We Want to 
Protect Our Children’s Future,” Quartz Africa, January 3, 2017 (https://qz.com/876708/why-liberia-is-work-
ing-with-bridge-international-brac-and-rising-academies-by-education-minister-george-werner/).


--- PAGE 7 ---
370
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
FEBRUARY 2020
Providers receive funding on a ­per-pupil basis. In exchange they are responsible for 
the daily management of the schools.
The government allocated rights to eight providers to manage public schools 
under the PSL program. The organizations are as follows: Bridge International 
Academies (23 schools), BRAC (20 schools), Omega Schools (19 schools), Street 
Child (12 schools), More than Me (6 schools), Rising Academies (5 schools), Youth 
Movement for Collective Action (4 schools), and Stella Maris (4 schools). See 
online Appendix A.5 for more details about each organization.
Rather than attempting to write a complete contract specifying private provid-
ers’ full responsibilities, the government opted instead to select organizations it 
deemed aligned with its mission of raising learning levels (i.e., “­mission-matching” 
à la Besley and Ghatak 2005, Akerlof and Kranton 2005). After an open and com-
petitive bidding process led by the Ministry of Education with the support of the 
Ark Education Partnerships Group, the Liberian government selected seven of 
the eight organizations listed above, of which six passed financial due diligence. 
Stella Maris did not complete this step and, although included in our sample, was 
never paid. While Stella Maris never actually took control of their assigned schools, 
the government still considers them part of the program (e.g., they were allocated 
more schools in an expansion of the program not studied in this paper (Ministry 
of Education–Liberia 2017b)). The government made a separate agreement with 
Bridge International Academies (not based on a competitive tender), but also con-
siders Bridge part of the PSL program.
PSL schools remain public schools and all grades are required to be free of charge 
and ­nonselective (i.e., providers are not allowed to charge fees or to discriminate 
in admissions). In contrast, traditional public schools are not free for all grades. 
Public primary education is nominally free starting in Grade 1, but tuition for early 
childhood education in traditional public schools is stipulated at LBD 3,500 per year 
(about US$38).
PSL school buildings remain under the ownership of the government. Teachers 
in PSL schools are civil servants, drawn from the existing pool of government 
teachers. The Ministry of Education’s financial obligation to PSL schools is the 
same as all ­government-run schools: it provides teachers and maintenance, valued 
at about US$50 per student. A noteworthy feature of PSL is that providers receive 
additional funding of US$50 per student (with a maximum of US$3,250 or 65 stu-
dents per grade). Donors paid for the transfers made to providers in the first year. 
Donor money was attached to the PSL program and would not have been available 
to the government otherwise. Neither Bridge International Academies nor Stella 
Maris received the extra US$50 per pupil. As mentioned above, Stella Maris did not 
complete financial due diligence. Bridge International Academies had a separate 
agreement with the Ministry of Education and relied entirely on direct grants from 
donors. Providers have complete autonomy over the use of these funds (e.g., they 
can be used for teacher training, school inputs, or management personnel).9 On top 
of that, providers may raise more funds on their own.
9 Providers may spend funds hiring more teachers (or other school staff). Thus, it is possible that some of the 
teachers in PSL schools are not civil servants. However, this rarely occurred. Only 8 percent of teachers in PSL 
schools were paid by providers at the end of the school year. Informal interviews with providers indicate that in 


--- PAGE 8 ---
371
ROMERO ET AL.: OUTSOURCING EDUCATION
VOL. 110 NO. 2
Providers must teach the Liberian national curriculum, but may supplement it with 
remedial programs, prioritization of subjects, longer school days, and ­nonacademic 
activities. They are welcome to provide more inputs such as extra teachers, books, 
or uniforms, as long as they pay for them.
The intended differences between treated (PSL) and control (traditional public) 
schools are summarized in Table 1. First, PSL schools are managed by private orga-
nizations. Second, PSL schools are theoretically guaranteed (as per the contract) 
one teacher per grade in each school, plus extra funding. Third, private providers 
are authorized to cap class sizes. Finally, while both PSL and traditional public 
schools are free for primary students starting in first grade, public schools charge 
­early-childhood education (ECE) fees.
What Do Providers Do?—Providers enjoy considerable flexibility in defining the 
intervention. They are free to choose their preferred mix of, say, new teaching materi-
als, teacher training, and managerial oversight of the schools’ ­day-to-day operations. 
Rather than relying on providers’ own description of their model, where there may be 
incentives to exaggerate and activities may be defined in ­noncomparable ways across 
providers, we administered a survey module to teachers in treatment schools, asking 
if they had heard of the provider, and if so, what activities the provider had engaged 
in. We summarize teachers’ responses in Figure 1, which shows considerable varia-
tion in the specific activities and the total activity level of providers.
For instance, teachers reported that two providers (Omega and Bridge) provided 
computers to schools, which fits with the stated approach of these two interna-
tional, ­for-profit firms. Other providers, such as BRAC and Street Child, put more 
focus on teacher training and observing teachers in the classroom, though these 
most cases providers are paying these salaries while awaiting placement of the teachers on the government payroll. 
Providers expect to be reimbursed by the government once this occurs.
Table 1—Policy Differences between Treatment and Control Schools
Control schools
PSL treatment schools
Management
  Who owns school building?
Government
Government
  Who employs and pays teachers?
Government
Government
  Who manages the school and teachers?
Government
Provider
  Who sets curriculum?
Government
Government ​+​ provider supplement
Funding
  Primary user fees (annual US$)
Zero
Zero
  ECE user fees (annual US$)
US$38
Zero
  Extra funding per pupil (annual US$)
NA
US$50a ​+​ independent fund-raising
Staffing
  Pupil-teacher ratios
NA
Promised one teacher per grade,
allowed to cap class sizes at 45–65 pupilsb
  New teacher hiring
NA
First pick of new teacher-training graduatesc
a Neither Bridge International Academies nor Stella Maris received the extra US$50 per pupil.
b Bridge International Academies was authorized to cap class sizes at 55 (but in practice capped them at 45 in 
most cases as this was allowed by the MOU), while other providers were authorized to cap class sizes at 65.
c Bridge International Academies had first pick, before other providers, of the new teacher-training graduates.


--- PAGE 9 ---
372
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
FEBRUARY 2020
­differences were not dramatic. In general, providers such as More than Me and 
Rising Academies showed high activity levels across dimensions, while teacher sur-
veys confirmed administrative reports that Stella Maris conducted almost no activi-
ties in its assigned schools.
Cost Data and Assumptions.—The government designed the PSL program 
based on the estimate that it spends roughly US$50 per child in all public schools 
(mostly on teacher salaries), and it planned to continue to do so in PSL schools.10 As 
shown in Section II, PSL led to reallocation of additional teaching staff to treatment 
schools and reduced ­pupil-teacher ratios in treatment schools, raising the Ministry’s 
­per-pupil cost to close to US$70. On top of this, providers were offered a US$50 
­per-pupil payment to cover their costs. As noted above, neither Bridge International 
Academies nor Stella Maris received the extra US$50 per pupil. This cost figure 
10 Werner, “Liberia Has to Work with International Private School Companies If We Want to Protect Our 
Children’s Future,” Quartz Africa.	
Figure 1. What Did Providers Do?
Notes: The figure reports simple proportions (not treatment effects) of teachers surveyed in PSL schools who 
reported whether the provider responsible for their school had engaged in each of the activities listed. The sample 
size, ​n​, of teachers interviewed with respect to each provider is: Stella Maris, 26; Omega, 141; YMCA, 26; BRAC, 
170; Bridge, 157; Street Child, 80; Rising Academy, 31; More than Me, 46. This sample only includes compliant 
treatment schools.
42
46
42
0
85
96
88
54
61
100
100
13
42
95
94
93
87
100
100
76
90
100
100
94
68
100
99
91
85
100
100
96
0
12
4
0
0
0
23
0
0
0
69
96
65
92
0
77
46
12
54
8
75
73
30
30
94
62
58
25
27
2
54
94
92
86
0
85
45
24
69
1
97
99
18
70
99
87
50
53
73
1
94
71
97
97
3
97
81
52
87
10
68
94
94
88
3
93
58
13
83
0
98
96
91
98
2
96
37
93
91
17
42
0
0
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
23
19
4
4
0
12
12
12
8
12
43
45
45
24
7
54
8
23
9
36
56
81
17
33
5
36
10
11
2
16
39
65
18
18
10
38
7
13
5
8
19
45
26
58
6
6
0
13
0
6
66
74
29
44
18
51
21
35
10
16
70
85
50
43
9
63
41
65
28
35
Stella M
YMCA
Omega
BRAC
Bridge
Rising
St. Child
MtM
Has anyone from (provider) been to this school? (%)
Heard of (provider) (%)
Heard of PSL (%)
Provider staff visits at least once a week (%)
Computers, tablets, electronics (%)
Copybooks (%)
Food programs (%)
Organization of community meetings (%)
Paper (%)
School repairs (%)
Teacher guides (or teacher manuals) (%)
Teacher received training since Aug 2016 (%)
Teacher training (%)
Textbooks (%)
Ask students questions to test learning (%)
Check attendance and collect records (%)
Deliver information (%)
Meet with principal (%)
Meet with PTA committee (%)
Monitor health/sanitation issues (%)
Monitor other school−based government programs (%)
Monitor/observe PSL program (%)
Observe teaching practices and give suggestions (%)
Provide/deliver educational materials (%)
Provider
Provider support
Ever provided
Most recent visit


--- PAGE 10 ---
373
ROMERO ET AL.: OUTSOURCING EDUCATION
VOL. 110 NO. 2
was chosen because US$100 was deemed a realistic ­medium-term goal for public 
expenditure on primary education nationwide.11
In the first year, some providers spent far more than this amount. Ex ante ­per-pupil 
budgets submitted to the program secretariat before the school year started (on 
top of the Ministry’s costs) ranged from a low of approximately US$57 for Youth 
Movement for Collective Action to a high of US$1,050 for Bridge International 
Academies (see panel A of Figure 2). Ex post ­per-pupil expenditure submitted to 
the evaluation team at the end of the school year (on top of the Ministry’s costs) 
ranged from a low of approximately US$48 for Street Child to a high of US$663 
for Bridge International Academies (see panel B of Figure 2). These differences in 
costs are large relative to differences in treatment effects on learning, implying that 
­cost-effectiveness may be driven largely by cost assumptions.
In principle, the costs incurred by private providers would be irrelevant for pol-
icy evaluation in a ­public-private partnership with this structure. If the providers 
are willing to make an agreement in which the government pays US$50 per pupil, 
providers’ losses are inconsequential to the government (philanthropic donors have 
stepped in to fund some providers’ high costs under PSL).12 Thus, we present anal-
yses using both the Ministry’s US$50 ­long-term cost target and providers’ actual 
budgets.13
11 Ibid.
12 These costs matter to the government under at least two scenarios. First, if providers are spending more 
during the first years of the program to prove effectiveness, they may lower expenditure (and quality) once they 
have locked in ­long-term contracts. Second, if private providers are not financially sustainable, they may close 
schools and disrupt student learning.
13 While some providers relied almost exclusively on the US$50 per child subsidy from the PSL pool fund, 
others have raised more money from donors. Bridge International Academies relied entirely on direct grants from 
donors and opted not to take part in the competitive bidding process for the US$50 per-pupil subsidy which closed 
in June 2016. Bridge did subsequently submit an application for this funding in January 2017, which was not 
approved, but allows us access to their budget data.
Figure 2. Budget and Costs as Reported by Providers
Notes: Numbers in panel A are based on ­ex ante budgets submitted to the program secretariat in a uniform tem-
plate (inclusive of both fixed and variable costs). Stella Maris did not provide budget data. Numbers in panel B are 
based on ­self-reports on ­ex post expenditures (inclusive of both fixed and variable costs) submitted to the evaluation 
team by five providers in various formats. Numbers do not include the cost of teaching staff borne by the Ministry 
of Education.
Panel A. Ex ante budget per pupil
YMCA
St. Child
Omega
BRAC
Rising
MtM
Bridge
US$
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
US$
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
57
60
60
72
181
322
1,052
Panel B. Ex post cost per pupil
St. Child
Omega
Rising
MtM
Bridge
Start-up costs
Year 1
48
40
270
256
663
Start-up costs
Year 1


--- PAGE 11 ---
374
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
FEBRUARY 2020
Providers’ budgets for the first year of the program are likely a naïve measure 
of program cost, as they combine ­start-up costs, fixed costs, and variable costs. It 
is possible to distinguish ­start-up costs from other costs as shown in Figure 2, and 
these make up a small share of the ­first-year totals for most providers. It is not pos-
sible to distinguish fixed from variable costs in the budget data. In informal inter-
views, some providers (e.g., Street Child) profess operating a ­variable-cost model, 
implying that each additional school costs roughly the same amount to operate. 
Others (e.g., Bridge) report that their costs are almost entirely fixed, and unit costs 
would fall if scaled; however, we have no direct evidence of this. Our estimate is 
that Bridge’s international operating cost, at scale, is between US$191 and US$220 
per pupil annually.14
B. Experimental Design
Sampling and Random Assignment.—Liberia has 2,619 public primary schools. 
Private providers and the government agreed that potential PSL schools should have 
at least six classrooms and six teachers, good road access, a single shift, and should 
not contain a secondary school on their premises. A few schools were added to the 
list at the request of Bridge International Academies. Some of these schools had 
double shifts. Only 299 schools satisfied all the criteria, although some of these are 
“soft” constraints that can be addressed if the program expands. For example, the 
government can build more classrooms and add more teachers to the school staff. On 
average, schools in the experiment are closer to the capital (Monrovia), have more 
students, greater resources, and better infrastructure. While schools in the RCT gen-
erally have better facilities and infrastructure than most schools in the country, they 
still have deficiencies. For example, the average school in Liberia has 1.8 permanent 
classrooms, and the median school has 0 permanent classrooms, while the average 
school in the RCT has 3.16 classrooms. Panel A of Figure 3 shows all public schools 
in Liberia and those within our sample. Online Appendix Table A.1 has details on 
the differences between schools in the experiment and other public schools.
Two providers (Omega Schools and Bridge International Academies) required 
schools with 2G connectivity. Each provider submitted to the government a list of 
the regions in which they were willing to work (Bridge International Academies 
had first pick of schools). Based on preferences and requirements the list of eligible 
schools was partitioned across providers. We paired schools in the experiment sam-
ple within each district according to a principal component analysis (PCA) index of 
school resources.15 This pairing stratified treatment by school resources within each 
14 In written testimony to the UK House of Commons, Bridge stated that its fees were between US$78 and 
US$110 per annum in private schools, and that it had approximately 100,000 students in both private and PPP 
schools (Bridge International Academies 2017, Kwauk and Robinson 2016). Of these, roughly 9,000 are in PPP 
schools and pay no fees. In sworn oral testimony, ­cofounder Shannon May stated that Bridge had supplemented its 
fee revenue with more than US$12 million in the previous year (May 2017). This is equal to an additional US$120 
per pupil, and implies Bridge spends between US$191 and US$220 per pupil at its current global scale.
15 We calculated the index using the first eigenvector of a principal component analysis that included the fol-
lowing variables: students per teacher; students per classroom; students per chair; students per desk; students per 
bench; students per chalkboard; students per book; whether the school has a permanent building; whether the school 
has piped water, a pump, or a well; whether the school has a toilet; whether the school has a staff room; whether the 
school has a generator; and the number of enrolled students.


--- PAGE 12 ---
375
ROMERO ET AL.: OUTSOURCING EDUCATION
VOL. 110 NO. 2
private provider, but not across providers. We gave a list of pairs to each provider 
based on their location preferences and requirements, so that each list had twice the 
number of schools they were to operate. Once each provider approved this list, we 
randomized the treatment assignment within each pair. There is one triplet due to 
logistical constraints in the assignment across counties, which resulted in one extra 
treatment school. In short, schools are assigned to a provider, then paired, and then 
randomly assigned to treatment or control.
Private providers did not manage all the schools originally assigned to treatment 
and we treat these schools as ­noncompliant, presenting results in an ­intention-to-treat 
framework. After providers visited their assigned schools to start preparing for the 
upcoming school year, two treatment schools turned out to be private schools that were 
incorrectly labeled in the government data as public schools. Two other schools had 
only two classrooms each. Of these four schools, two had originally been assigned 
to More Than Me and two had been assigned to Street Child. Omega Academies 
opted not to operate two of their assigned schools and Rising Academies opted not 
to operate one of their assigned schools. In total, there are seven ­noncompliant treat-
ment schools.16 Panel B of Figure 3 shows the treatment assignment.
16 More than Me and Street Child were provided with replacement schools, presenting them with a new list 
of counterparts and informing them, as before, that they would operate one of each pair of schools (but not which 
one). Providers approved the list before we randomly assigned replacement schools from it. However, we do not 
use this list as our main sample since it is not fully experimental. We analyzed results for this “final” treatment and 
control school list, and they are almost identical to the results for the “original” list. Results for this final list of 
treatment and control schools are available upon request. Bridge International Academies is managing two extra 
demonstration schools that were not randomized and are not part of our sample. Rising Academies was given one 
­nonrandomly assigned school, which is not part of our sample either. Thus, the set of schools in our analysis is 
Figure 3. Public Primary Schools in Liberia
Notes: Data on school location are from Ministry of Education–Liberia (2015-2016) data. Geographical informa-
tion on the administrative areas of Liberia comes from DIVA-GIS (2016).
Panel A. Geographical distribution of all public 
schools in Liberia and those within the RCT







 























































































































































































 















 





 


























































































































 













 












































































































 




  





 






























































 












 






 





































 































































































 

















 






















 
































 





















 































 
























 


 














































 











































 




























 
 














 






































 





















 




































 











Lofa
Margibi
Maryland
Montserrado
Nimba
River Cess
River Gee
Sinoe
Bomi
Bong
Gbapolu
Grand Cape Mount
GrandBassa
GrandGedeh
GrandKru

Public schools
RCT
0
50
100
km
Panel B. Geographical distribution 
of treatment and control schools
























 
















































 













Lofa
Margibi
Maryland
Montserrado
Nimba
River Cess
River Gee
Sinoe
Bomi
Bong
Gbapolu
Grand Cape Mount
GrandBassa
GrandGedeh
GrandKru

Treatment
Control
0
50
100
km


--- PAGE 13 ---
376
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
FEBRUARY 2020
Treatment assignment may change the student composition across schools. To 
prevent differences in the composition of students from driving differences in test 
scores, we sampled 20 students per school (from K1 to grade 5) from enrollment 
logs from 2015-2016, the year before the treatment was introduced. We associate 
each student with his or her “original” school, regardless of what school (if any) he 
or she attended in subsequent years. The combination of random treatment assign-
ment at the school level with measuring outcomes of a fixed and comparable pool 
of students allows us to provide clean estimates of the program’s ­intention-to-treat 
(ITT) effect on test scores within the student population originally attending study 
schools, uncontaminated by selection.
Time Line of Research and Intervention Activities.—We collected data in schools 
twice: at the beginning of the school year in September-October 2016 and at the 
end of the school year in May-June 2017.17 We collected the first round of data 
two to eight weeks after the beginning of treatment. While we intended the first 
survey wave to serve as a baseline, logistical delays led it to take place shortly after 
the beginning of the school year. We see evidence of treatment effects within this 
­1–2-month time frame and treat this early wave as a very ­short-term outcome sur-
vey. Hence, we do not control for test scores collected during the first wave of data 
collection.18 We focus on ­time-invariant covariates and administrative data collected 
before the program began when checking balance between treatment and control 
schools (see Section IB).
Test Design.—In our sample, literacy cannot be assumed at any grade level, pre-
cluding the possibility of written tests. In addition, tests administered by schools 
would be contaminated by shifts in enrollment and attendance due to treatment. We 
opted to conduct one-on-one tests in which an enumerator sits with the student (either 
at school or at home), asks questions, and records answers. For the math part of the test 
we provided students with scratch paper and a pencil. We designed the tests to capture 
a wide range of student abilities. To make the test scores comparable across grades, 
we constructed a single adaptive test for all students. The test has stop rules that skip 
­higher-order skills if the student is not able to answer questions related to more basic 
skills. Online Appendix Section A.3 has details on the construction of the test.
We estimate an item response theory (IRT) model for each round of data col-
lection. IRT models are the standard in the assessments literature for generating 
not identical to the set of schools actually managed by PSL providers. Online Appendix Table A.2 summarizes the 
overlap between schools in our main sample and the set of schools actually managed by PSL providers.
17 A third round of data collection took place in March-April 2019 (see online Appendix Figure A.2 for a 
detailed time line of intervention and research activities).
18 Our ­pre-analysis plan was written on the assumption that we would be able to collect baseline data (Romero, 
Sandefur, and Sandholtz 2017). Hence, the ­pre-analysis plan includes a specification that controls for test scores col-
lected during the first wave of data collection along with the main specifications used in this paper. We report these 
results in online Appendix Table A.4. We view the differences in ­short-term outcomes as treatment effects rather than 
“chance bias” in randomization for the following reasons. First, ­time-invariant student characteristics are balanced 
across treatment and control (see Table 2). Second, the effects on English and math test scores appear to materialize 
in the later weeks of the fieldwork, as shown in online Appendix Figure A.3. Third, there is no significant effect on 
abstract reasoning, which is arguably less amenable to ­short-term improvements through teaching (although the 
difference between a significant English-math effect and an insignificant abstract reasoning effect here is not itself 
significant).


--- PAGE 14 ---
377
ROMERO ET AL.: OUTSOURCING EDUCATION
VOL. 110 NO. 2
­comparative test scores.19 There are two relevant characteristics of IRT models in 
this setting. First, they simultaneously estimate the test taker’s ability and the dif-
ficulty of the questions, which allows the contribution of “correct answers” to the 
ability measure to vary from question to question. Second, they provide a compara-
ble measure of student ability across different grades and survey rounds, even if the 
question overlap is imperfect. A common scale across grades allows us to estimate 
treatment effects as additional years of schooling. Following standard practice, we 
normalize the IRT scores with respect to the control group.
Additional Data.—We surveyed all the teachers in each school and conducted 
­in-depth surveys with those teaching math and English. We asked teachers about 
their time use and teaching strategies. We also obtained teacher opinions on the 
PSL program. For a randomly selected class within each school, we conducted a 
classroom observation using the Stallings Classroom Observation Tool (World Bank 
2015a). Furthermore, we conducted ­school-level surveys to collect information 
about school facilities, the teacher roster, input availability (e.g., textbooks), and 
expenditures.
Enumerators collected information on some school practices. Specifically, enu-
merators recorded whether the school has an enrollment log and what information 
it stores; whether the school has an official time table and whether it is posted; 
whether the school has a ­parent-teacher association (PTA) and if the principal 
knows the PTA head’s contact information (or where to find it); and whether the 
school has a written budget and keeps a record (and receipts) of past expenditures.20 
Additionally, we asked principals to complete two commonly used human resource 
instruments to measure their “intuitive score” (Agor 1989) and “time management 
profile” (Schermerhorn et al. 2011).
For the second wave of data collection, we surveyed a random subset of house-
holds from our student sample, recording household characteristics and attitudes of 
household members. We also gathered data on school enrollment and learning levels 
for all children ­4–8 years old living in these households.
Balance and Attrition.—As mentioned above, the first wave of data was collected 
2 to 8 weeks after the beginning of treatment. Hence, we focus on ­time-invariant 
characteristics when checking balance across treatment and control. Observable 
(­time-invariant) characteristics of students and schools are balanced across treatment 
and control (see Table 2). Eighty percent of schools in our sample are in rural areas, 
over an hour away from the nearest bank (which is usually located in the nearest 
19 For example, IRT models are used to estimate students’ ability in the Graduate Record Examinations (GRE), 
the Scholastic Assessment Test (SAT), the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA), the Trends in 
International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS), and the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study 
(PIRLS) assessments. The use of IRT models in the development and education literature in economics is less prev-
alent, but becoming common. For example, see Das and Zajonc (2010); Andrabi et al. (2011); Andrabi, Das, and 
Khwaja (2017); Singh (2015, forthcoming); Muralidharan, Singh, and Ganimian (2019); and Mbiti et al. (2019). Das 
and Zajonc (2010) provide an introduction to IRT models, while van der Linden (2018) provides a full treatment of 
IRT models.
20 While management practices are difficult to measure, previous work has constructed detailed instruments 
to measure them in schools (e.g., see Bloom et al. 2015, Crawfurd 2017, Lemos and Scur 2016). Due to budget 
constraints, we only checked easily observable differences in school management.


--- PAGE 15 ---
378
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
FEBRUARY 2020
urban center), and over 10 percent need to hold some classes outside due to insuffi-
cient classrooms. Boys make up 55 percent of our students and the students’ average 
age is 12. According to ­pretreatment administrative data (Ministry of Education–
Liberia ­2015–2016), the number of students, infrastructure, and resources available 
to students were not statistically different across treatment and control schools (for 
details, see online Appendix Table A.3).
We took great care to avoid attrition: enumerators conducting student assess-
ments participated in extra training on tracking and its importance, and dedicated 
generous time to tracking. Students were tracked to their homes and tested there 
Table 2—Balance: Observable, Time-Invariant School and Student Characteristics 
Treatment
Control
Difference
Difference (FE)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A. School characteristics (observations = 185)
Facilities (PCA)
−0.080
−0.003
−0.077
−0.070
(1.504)
(1.621)
(0.230)
(0.232)
Percent holds some classes outside
13.978
14.130
−0.152
−0.000
(34.864)
(35.024)
(5.138)
(5.094)
Percent rural
79.570
80.435
−0.865
−0.361
(40.538)
(39.888)
(5.913)
(4.705)
Travel time to nearest bank (minutes)
75.129
68.043
7.086
7.079
(69.099)
(60.509)
(9.547)
(8.774)
Panel B. Student characteristics (observations = 3,508)
Age in years
12.394
12.291
0.104
0.059
(2.848)
(2.935)
(0.169)
(0.112)
Percent male
54.949
56.146
−1.197
−1.459
(49.769)
(49.635)
(2.041)
(1.247)
Wealth index
−0.006
0.024
−0.030
0.011
(1.529)
(1.536)
(0.140)
(0.060)
Percent in top wealth quartile
0.199
0.219
−0.020
−0.018
(0.399)
(0.413)
(0.026)
(0.014)
Percent in bottom wealth quartile
0.267
0.284
−0.017
−0.011
(0.442)
(0.451)
(0.039)
(0.019)
ECE before grade 1
0.832
0.818
0.014
0.013
(0.374)
(0.386)
(0.025)
(0.017)
Panel C. Attrition in the second wave of data collection (observations = 3,511)
Percent interviewed
95.60
95.74
−0.14
−0.35
(20.52)
(20.20)
(0.64)
(0.44)
Notes: The first wave of data was collected 2 to 8 weeks after the beginning of treatment; hence, the focus here is 
on time-invariant characteristics (some of these characteristics may vary in response to the program in the long run, 
but are time-invariant given the duration of our study). This table presents the mean and standard error of the mean 
(in parentheses) for the control (column 1) and treatment (column 2), as well as the difference between treatment 
and control (column 3), and the difference taking into account the randomization design (i.e., including pair fixed 
effects) in column 4. Panel A has two measures of school infrastructure: the first is a school infrastructure index 
made up of the first component in a principal component analysis of indicator variables for classrooms, staff room, 
student and adult latrines, library, playground, and an improved water source. The second is whether the school ever 
needs to hold classes outside due to lack of classrooms. There are two measures of school rurality. First, a binary 
variable and second, the time it takes to travel by motorcycle to the nearest bank. Panel B has student characteris-
tics. The wealth index is the first component of a principal component analysis of indicator variables for whether the 
student’s household has a television, radio, electricity, a refrigerator, a mattress, a motorcycle, a fan, and a phone. 
Panel C shows the attrition rate (proportion of students interviewed at the first round of data collection who we were 
able to interview in the second wave). Standard errors are clustered at the school level.


--- PAGE 16 ---
379
ROMERO ET AL.: OUTSOURCING EDUCATION
VOL. 110 NO. 2
when not available at school. Attrition in the second wave of data collection from 
our original sample is balanced between treatment and control and is below 4 per-
cent (see panel C). Online Appendix Section A.2 has more details on the tracking 
and attrition that took place during data collection.
II.  Experimental Results
In this section, we first explore how the PSL program affected access to and 
quality of education. We then turn to mechanisms, looking at changes in material 
inputs, staffing, and school management. Replication data are available at Romero, 
Sandefur, and Sandholtz (2018).
A. Test Scores
Following our ­pre-analysis plan (Romero, Sandefur, and Sandholtz 2017), we 
report ­treatment-effect estimates from two specifications:
(1)	
​​Y​isg​  =  ​α​g​ + ​β​1​ trea​t​s​ + ​ε​isg​​,
(2)	
​​Y​isg​  =  ​α​g​ + ​β​2​ trea​t​s​ + ​γ​2​ ​X​i​ + ​δ​2​ ​Z​s​ + ​ε​isg​​.
The first specification amounts to a simple comparison of ­post-treatment outcomes 
for treatment and control individuals, in which ​​Y​isg​​ is the outcome of interest for 
student ​i​ in school ​s​ and group ​g​ (denoting the matched pairs used for randomiza-
tion); ​​α​g​​ is a ­matched-pair fixed effect (i.e., ­stratification-level dummies); ​trea​t​s​​ is 
an indicator for whether school ​s​ was randomly chosen for treatment; and ​​ε​isg​​ is an 
error term. The second specification adds controls for ­time-invariant characteristics 
measured at the individual level (​​X​i​​) and school level (​​Z​s​​).21 We estimate both speci-
fications via ordinary least squares, clustering the standard errors at the school level.
Table 3 shows results from student tests. The first three columns show dif-
ferences between control and treatment schools’ test scores after ­1–2 months of 
treatment (September-October 2016), while the last three columns show the dif-
ference after ­9–10 months of treatment (May-June 2017). Columns 1, 2, 4, and 
5 show ­intention-to-treat (ITT) treatment estimates, while columns 3 and 6 show 
­treatment-on-the-treated (ToT) estimates (i.e., the treatment effect for students 
that actually attended a PSL school in 2016-2017). The ToT is estimated using the 
21 These controls were specified in the ­pre-analysis plan and are listed in online Appendix Table A.5 (Romero, 
Sandefur, and Sandholtz 2017). We had committed in the ­pre-analysis plan to a specification that controlled for 
­pretreatment individual outcomes:
(3)	
​​Y​isg​​  = ​α​g​​ + ​β​3​​ trea​t​s​​ + ​γ​3​​ ​X​i​​ + ​δ​3​​ ​Z​s​​ + ​ζ​3​​ ​Y​isg,−1​​ + ​ε​isg​​​.
However, as mentioned before, the first wave of data was collected after the beginning of treatment, so we lack a 
true baseline of student test scores. We report this specification in online Appendix Table A.4. The results are still 
statistically significant, but mechanically downward biased.


--- PAGE 17 ---
380
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
FEBRUARY 2020
assigned treatment as an instrument for whether the student is in fact enrolled in a 
PSL school during the 2016-2017 academic year.22
After ­1–2 months of treatment, student test scores increased by 0.05​σ​ in math 
(  ­p-value = 0.09) and 0.07​σ​ in English (­  p-value = 0.04). Part of these ­short-term 
improvements can be explained by the fact that most providers started the school 
year on time, while most traditional public schools began classes ­1–4 weeks later. 
Hence, most students were already attending classes on a regular basis in treatment 
schools during our field visit, while their counterparts in control schools were not. 
We estimate the treatment effect separately for students tested during the first and 
the second half of the first round of data collection (see online Appendix Figure 
A.3), and show that the treatment effects fade in during the course of field work, 
further supporting our conclusion that these results represent early treatment effects 
as opposed to baseline imbalance.
In our preferred specification (column 5), the treatment effect of PSL after 
one academic year is 0.18​σ​ for English (­  p-value ​<  0.001​) and 0.18​σ​ for math 
(­p-value ​<  0.001​). We focus on the ITT effect, but the ToT effect is 0.21​σ​ for 
English (­  p-value ​<  0.001​) and 0.22​σ​ for math (­  p-value ​<  0.001​). Our results are 
22 The percentage of students originally assigned to treatment schools who were actually in treatment schools 
at the end of the 2016-2017 school year is 81 percent. The percentage of students assigned to control schools who 
were in treatment schools at the end of the 2016-2017 school year is 0 percent.
Table 3—ITT Treatment Effects on Learning
First wave
(1–2 months after treatment)
Second wave
(9–10 months after treatment)
ITT
ToT
ITT
ToT
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
English
0.09
0.07
0.08
0.17
0.18
0.21
(0.05)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.04)
Math
0.07
0.05
0.06
0.19
0.18
0.22
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.04)
Abstract
0.05
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.06
(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.05)
Composite
0.08
0.06
0.07
0.19
0.18
0.22
(0.05)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.04)
New modules
0.20
0.19
0.23
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04)
Conceptual
0.13
0.12
0.15
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.05)
Controls
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Observations
3,508
3,508
3,508
3,492
3,492
3,492
Notes: Columns 1–3 are based on the first wave of data and show the difference between treatment and control 
schools taking into account the randomization design, i.e., including “pair” fixed effects (column 1), the difference 
taking into account other student and school controls (column 2), and the treatment-on-the-treated (ToT) estimates 
(column 3). Columns 4–6 are based on the second wave of data and show the difference between treatment and 
control taking into account the randomization design, i.e., including “pair” fixed effects (column 4), the difference 
taking into account other student and school controls (column 5), and the treatment-on-the-treated (ToT) estimates 
(column 6). The treatment-on-the-treated effects are estimated using the assigned treatment as an instrument for 
whether the student was in fact enrolled in a PSL school at the time of data collection. Standard errors are clustered 
at the school level.


--- PAGE 18 ---
381
ROMERO ET AL.: OUTSOURCING EDUCATION
VOL. 110 NO. 2
robust to different measures of student ability (see online Appendix Table A.6 for 
details).
An important concern when interpreting these results is whether they repre-
sent real gains in learning or better ­test-taking skills resulting from “teaching to 
the test.” We show suggestive evidence that these results represent real gains. First, 
the treatment effect is significant (0.19​σ​, ­p-value ​<  0.001​) for new modules that 
were not in the first wave test (and unknown to the providers or the teachers), and 
statistically indistinguishable from the treatment effect over all the items (0.18​σ​, 
­p-value ​<  0.001​). Second, the treatment effect is positive and significant (0.12​σ​, 
­p-value 0.0014) for the conceptual questions (which do not resemble the format of 
standard textbook exercises). We cannot rule out that providers narrowed the cur-
riculum by focusing on English and mathematics or, conversely, that they generated 
additional learning gains in other subjects that we did not test.23 We find no evidence 
of heterogeneous treatment effects by students’ ­socioeconomic status, gender, or 
grade (see online Appendix Table A.8).
B. Enrollment, Attendance, and Student Selection
The previous section showed that education quality, measured using test scores in 
an ITT framework, increased in PSL schools. We now ask whether the PSL program 
increased access to education. To explore this question we focus on three outcomes 
which were committed to in the ­pre-analysis plan: enrollment, student attendance, 
and student selection (Romero, Sandefur, and Sandholtz 2017). PSL increased enroll-
ment overall, but in schools where enrollment was already high and classes were 
large, the program led to a significant decline in enrollment. This does not appear to 
be driven by selection of “better” students, but by providers capping class sizes and 
eliminating double shifts.24 As shown in online Appendix Section A.5, almost the 
entirety of this phenomenon is explained by Bridge International Academies.
Enrollment changes across treatment and control schools are shown in panel A 
of Table 4. There are a few noteworthy items. First, treatment schools are slightly 
larger before treatment: they have 34 (­  p-value 0.095) more students on average 
before treatment. Online Appendix Table A.3 uses administrative data, while Table 4 
uses data independently collected by our survey teams. While the difference in 
enrollment in the 2015-2016 academic year is only significant in the latter, the point 
estimates are similar across both tables. Second, PSL schools on average have 57 
(  ­p-value ​<  0.001​) more students than control schools in the 2016-2017 academic 
year, which results in a net increase (after controlling for ­pretreatment differences) 
of 25 (­  p-value 0.09) students per school.
23 As shown in Table 7, PSL schools have longer school days. As a result, treatment schools spend about 45 min-
utes per week more in both English and math. However, they do not spend a larger fraction of the school day in 
English or math (see online Appendix Table A.7). More broadly, we cannot rule out that PSL spent disproportion-
ately more resources improving English and math instruction.
24 Three Bridge International Academies treatment schools (representing 28 percent of total enrollment in 
Bridge treatment schools) had double shifts in 2015-2016, but not in 2016-2017. One Omega Schools treatment 
school (representing 7.2 percent of total enrollment in Omega treatment schools) had double shifts in 2015-2016, 
but not in 2016-2017. The MOU between Bridge and the Ministry of Education authorized eliminating double shifts 
(Ministry of Education–Liberia 2016b).


--- PAGE 19 ---
382
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
FEBRUARY 2020
Since provider compensation is based on the number of students enrolled rather 
than the number of students actively attending school, increases in enrollment may 
not translate into increases in student attendance. An independent measure of stu-
dent attendance conducted by our enumerators during a spot check shows that stu-
dents in treatment schools are 16 ( p-value ​<  0.001​) percentage points more likely 
to be in school during class time (see panel A of Table 4).
Turning to the question of student selection, we find no evidence that any group 
of students is systematically excluded from PSL schools. The proportion of students 
with disabilities is not statistically different in PSL schools and control schools 
(panel A of Table 4).25 Among our sample of students (i.e., students sampled from 
the 2015-2016 enrollment log), students are equally likely across treatment and con-
trol to be enrolled in the same school in the 2016-2017 academic year as they were 
in 2015-2016, and equally likely to be enrolled in any school (see panel B). Finally, 
selection analysis using ­student-level data on wealth, gender, and age finds no evi-
dence of systematic exclusions (see online Appendix Table A.9).
25 However, the fraction of students identified as disabled in our sample is an order of magnitude lower than 
estimates for the percentage of disabled students in the United States and worldwide using roughly the same criteria 
(both about 5 percent: see Brault 2011, UNICEF 2013).
Table 4—ITT Treatment Effects on Enrollment, Attendance, and Selection
Treatment
Control
Difference
Difference (FE)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A. School-level data (observations = 175)
Enrollment, 2015-2016
298.45
264.11
34.34
34.18
(169.74)
(109.91)
(21.00)
(20.28)
Enrollment, 2016-2017
309.71
252.75
56.96
56.89
(118.96)
(123.41)
(18.07)
(16.29)
2015-2016 to 2016-2017 enrollment change
11.55
−6.06
17.61
24.60
(141.30)
(82.25)
(17.19)
(14.35)
Attendance percent (spot check)
48.02
32.83
15.19
15.57
(24.52)
(26.55)
(3.81)
(3.13)
Percent of students with disabilities
0.59
0.39
0.20
0.21
(1.16)
(0.67)
(0.14)
(0.15)
Panel B. Student-level data (observations = 3,639)
Percent enrolled in the same school
80.50
83.16
−2.66
0.71
(39.63)
(37.43)
(3.66)
(2.06)
Percent enrolled in school
94.13
93.99
0.14
1.23
(23.52)
(23.77)
(1.33)
(0.87)
Days missed, previous week
0.85
0.85
−0.00
−0.06
(1.41)
(1.40)
(0.10)
(0.07)
Notes: This table presents the mean and standard error of the mean (in parentheses) for the control (column 1) and 
treatment (column 2) groups, as well as the difference between treatment and control (column 3), and the differ-
ence taking into account the randomization design (i.e., including “pair” fixed effects) in column 4. Panel A presents 
school-level data including enrollment (taken from enrollment logs) and student attendance measure by our enu-
merators during a spot check in the middle of a school day. If the school was not in session during a regular school 
day we mark all students as absent. Panel B presents student-level data including whether the student is still enrolled 
in the same schools, whether he is enrolled in school at all, and whether it missed school in the previous week (con-
ditional on being enrolled in school). Standard errors are clustered at the school level.


--- PAGE 20 ---
383
ROMERO ET AL.: OUTSOURCING EDUCATION
VOL. 110 NO. 2
Providers are authorized to cap class sizes, which could lead to students being 
excluded from their previous school (and either transferred to another school or to no 
school at all). We estimate whether the caps are binding for each student by compar-
ing the average enrollment before treatment in her grade cohort and the two adjacent 
grade cohorts (i.e., one grade above and below) to the theoretical ­class-size cap under 
PSL. We average over three cohorts because some providers used placement tests to 
reassign students across grade levels. Thus, the “constrained” indicator is defined 
by the number of students enrolled in the student’s 2016-2017 “expected grade” (as 
predicted based on normal progression from their 2015-2016 grade) and adjacent 
grades, divided by the “maximum capacity” in those three grades in ­2016-2017 (as 
specified in our ­pre-analysis plan in Romero, Sandefur, and Sandholtz 2017):
	
​​c​igso​  =  ​ Enrollmen​t​is,g−1​ + Enrollmen​t​is,g​ + Enrollmen​t​is,g+1​ 
 
 
 
 
____________________________________ 
 
 
3 × Maximu​m​o​ 
​,​
where ​​c​igso​​ is our “constrained” measure for student ​i​, expected to be in grade ​g​ in 
2016-2017, at school ​s​, in a “pair” assigned to provider ​o​; ​Enrollmen​t​is,g−1​​ is enroll-
ment in the grade below the student’s expected grade, ​Enrollmen​t​is,g​​ is enrollment in 
the student’s expected grade, and ​Enrollmen​t​is,g+1​​ is enrollment in the grade above 
the student’s expected grade; ​Maximu​m​o​​ is the class cap approved for provider ​o​. We 
label a student’s ­grade-school combination as “constrained” if ​​c​igso​  >  1​.
Enrollment in constrained ­school-grades decreases, while enrollment in uncon-
strained ­school-grades increases (see column 1 in Table 5). Thus, schools far below 
the cap have positive treatment effects on enrollment and schools near or above the 
cap offset it with declining enrollment. Our student data reveal this pattern as well: 
columns 2 and 3 in Table 5 show the ITT effect on enrollment depending on whether 
students were enrolled in a constrained class in 2015-2016. In unconstrained classes 
students are more likely to be enrolled in the same school (and in any school). But in 
constrained classes students are less likely to be enrolled in the same school. While 
there is no effect on overall school enrollment, switching schools may be disruptive 
for children (Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin 2004). Finally, ­test scores improve for 
students in constrained classes. This result is difficult to interpret as it includes the 
positive treatment effect over students who did not change schools (compounded by 
smaller class sizes) with the effect over students removed from their schools. These 
results are robust to excluding adjacent grades from the “constrained” measure (see 
online Appendix Table A.10).
C. Intermediate Inputs
In this section we explore the effect of the PSL program on school inputs (includ-
ing teachers), school management (with a special focus on teacher behavior and 
pedagogy), and parental behavior.
Inputs and Resources.—Teachers, one of the most important inputs of educa-
tion, change in several ways in treatment schools (see panels A and B in Table 6). 
PSL schools have 2.6 more teachers on average (­  p-value ​<  0.001​), but this is 
not merely the result of operators hiring more teachers. Rather, the Ministry of 


--- PAGE 21 ---
384
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
FEBRUARY 2020
Education agreed to release some underperforming teachers from PSL schools, 
replace those teachers, and provide additional ones. Ultimately, the extra teachers 
result in lower ­pupil-teacher ratios (despite increased student enrollment). This 
­reshuffling of teachers means that PSL schools have younger and ­less-experienced 
teachers, who are more likely to have worked in private schools in the past and 
have higher test scores (we conducted simple memory, math, word association, and 
abstract thinking tests). Replacement and extra teachers are recent graduates from 
the Rural Teacher Training Institutes (see King et al. 2015 for details on this pro-
gram). While the program’s contracts made no provisions to pay teachers differently 
in treatment and control schools, teachers in PSL schools report higher wages. A 
potential explanation is that there are many teachers who are paid by the commu-
nity in public schools (commonly known as “volunteer” teachers). If higher salaries 
for teachers in PSL schools are conditional on them working in program schools, 
then this would create an incentive to perform well. However, we could not find an 
explanation for these higher salaries. Hence, it is unclear whether higher salaries 
are tied to the program. But large unconditional increases in teacher salaries have 
been shown elsewhere to have no effect on student performance in the short run  
(de Ree et al. 2018).
Our enumerators conducted a “materials” check during classroom observations 
(see panel C of Table 6). Since we could not conduct classroom observations in 
schools that were out of session during our visit, online Appendix Table A.11 pres-
ents Lee (2009) bounds on these treatment effects (control schools are more likely 
to be out of session). Conditional on the school being in session during our visit, 
students in PSL schools are 23 percentage points (  ­p-value ​<  0.001​) more likely to 
have a textbook and 8.2 percentage points (­  p-value 0.051) more likely to have writ-
ing materials (both a pen and a copybook). However, we cannot rule out that there 
is no overall effect as zero is within the Lee (2009) bounds.
Table 5—ITT Treatment Effects, by Whether Class Size Caps Are Binding
​Δ​ enrollment
Percent  
same school
Percent  
in school
Test scores
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Constrained  =  0 ​×​ treatment
5.30
3.90
1.65
0.15
(1.11)
(1.40)
(0.73)
(0.034)
Constrained  =  1 ​×​ treatment
−11.7
−12.5
0.085
0.35
(6.47)
(7.72)
(4.12)
(0.11)
Observations
1,635
3,637
3,485
3,490
Mean control (unconstrained)
−0.75
81.89
93.38
0.13
Mean control (constrained)
−7.73
83.85
94.81
−0.08
​​α​0​  =​  constrained − unconstrained
−17.05
−16.36
−1.56
0.20
p-value (​​H​0​: ​α​0​  =  0​)
0.01
0.04
0.71
0.07
Notes: Column 1 uses school-grade level data and the outcome is the change in enrollment 
(between 2015-2016 and 2016-2017) at the grade level. Columns 2–4 use student-level data. 
The outcomes are whether the student is in the same school (column 2), whether the student is 
still enrolled in any school (column 3), and the composite test score (column 4). There were 
194 constrained classes before treatment (holding 30 percent of students), and 1,468 uncon-
strained classes before treatment (holding 70 percent of students). Standard errors are clustered 
at the school level.


--- PAGE 22 ---
385
ROMERO ET AL.: OUTSOURCING EDUCATION
VOL. 110 NO. 2
School Management.—Two important management changes are shown in 
Table 7: PSL schools are 8.7 percentage points more likely to be in session (i.e., the 
school is open, students and teachers are on campus, and classes are taking place) 
during a regular school day (  ­p-value 0.058), and have a longer school day that trans-
lates into 3.2 more hours per week of instructional time (­  p-value 0.0011). Although 
principals in PSL schools have scores in the “intuitive” and “time management pro-
file” scale that are almost identical to their counterparts in traditional public schools, 
they spend more of their time on ­management-related activities (e.g., supporting 
Table 6—ITT Treatment Effects on Inputs and Resources 
Treatment
Control
Difference
Difference (FE)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A. School-level outcomes (observations = 185)
Number of teachers
9.62
7.02
2.60
2.61
(2.82)
(3.12)
(0.44)
(0.37)
Pupil-teacher ratio (PTR)
32.20
39.95
−7.74
−7.82
(12.29)
(18.27)
(2.31)
(2.12)
New teachers
4.81
1.77
3.03
3.01
(2.56)
(2.03)
(0.34)
(0.35)
Teachers dismissed
3.27
2.12
1.15
1.13
(3.81)
(2.62)
(0.48)
(0.47)
Panel B. Teacher-level outcomes (observations = 1,167)
Age in years
39.09
46.37
−7.28
−7.10
(11.77)
(11.67)
(1.02)
(0.68)
Experience in years
10.59
15.79
−5.20
−5.26
(9.20)
(10.77)
(0.76)
(0.51)
Percent has worked at a private school
47.12
37.50
9.62
10.20
(49.95)
(48.46)
(3.76)
(2.42)
Test score in standard deviations
0.13
−0.01
0.14
0.14
(1.02)
(0.99)
(0.07)
(0.06)
Percent certified (or tertiary education)
60.11
58.05
2.06
4.20
(48.99)
(49.39)
(4.87)
(2.99)
Salary (US$/month): conditional on salary  ​>  0​
121.36
104.54
16.82
13.90
(44.42)
(60.15)
(6.56)
(4.53)
Panel C. Classroom observation (observations = 143)
Number of seats
20.64
20.58
0.06
0.58
(13.33)
(13.57)
(2.21)
(1.90)
Percent with students sitting on the floor
2.41
4.23
−1.82
−1.51
(15.43)
(20.26)
(2.94)
(2.61)
Percent with chalk
96.39
78.87
17.51
16.58
(18.78)
(41.11)
(5.29)
(5.50)
Percent of students with textbooks
37.08
17.60
19.48
22.60
(43.22)
(35.25)
(6.33)
(6.32)
Percent of students with pens/pencils
88.55
79.67
8.88
8.16
(19.84)
(30.13)
(4.19)
(4.10)
Notes: This table presents the mean and standard error of the mean (in parentheses) for the control (column 2) and 
treatment (column 1) groups, as well as the difference between treatment and control (column 3), and the differ-
ence taking into account the randomization design (i.e., including “pair” fixed effects) in column 4. Panel A has 
school-level outcomes. Panel B presents teacher-level outcomes including their score in tests conducted by our sur-
vey teams. Panel C presents data on inputs measured during classroom observations. Since we could not conduct 
classroom observations in schools that were out of session during our visit, online Appendix Table A.11 presents 
Lee (2009) bounds on these treatment effects (control schools are more likely to be out of session). Standard errors 
are clustered at the school level.


--- PAGE 23 ---
386
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
FEBRUARY 2020
other teachers, monitoring student progress, meeting with parents) than actually 
teaching. This suggests a change in the role of the principal in these schools: perhaps 
as a result of additional teachers, principals in PSL schools did not have to double 
as teachers. Additionally, management practices (as measured by a “good practices” 
PCA index normalized to a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1 in the control 
group) are 0.4​σ​ (­  p-value 0.0011) higher in PSL schools.26 This effect size can be 
viewed as a boost for the average treated school from the fiftieth to the sixty-sixth 
percentile in management practices.
Teacher Behavior.—An important component of school management is teacher 
accountability and its effects on teacher behavior. As mentioned above, teachers 
in PSL schools are drawn from the pool of unionized civil servants with lifetime 
appointments and who are paid by the Liberian government. In theory, private pro-
viders have limited authority to request teacher reassignments and no authority to 
promote or dismiss civil service teachers. Thus, a central hypothesis underlying the 
PSL program is that providers can hold teachers accountable through monitoring 
and support, rather than rewards and threats.27
26 The index includes whether the school has an enrollment log and what information is in it, whether the school 
has an official time table and whether it is posted, whether the school has a ­parent-teacher association (PTA) and 
whether the principal has the PTA head’s number at hand, and whether the school keeps a record of expenditures 
and a written budget. Online Appendix Table A.12 has details on every component of the good practices index.
27 As mentioned above, in practice the Ministry of Education agreed to release some underperforming teachers 
from PSL schools at the request of providers. While providers could have provided teachers with performance 
incentives, we have no evidence that any of them did.
Table 7—ITT Treatment Effects on School Management
Treatment
Control
Difference
Difference (FE)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Percent school in session at spot check
92.47
83.70
8.78
8.66
(26.53)
(37.14)
(4.75)
(4.52)
Instruction time (hours/week)
17.84
14.69
3.15
3.17
(4.84)
(4.04)
(0.66)
(0.65)
Intuitive score (out of 12)
4.08
4.03
0.04
0.02
(1.35)
(1.38)
(0.20)
(0.19)
Time management score (out of 12)
5.60
5.69
−0.09
−0.10
(1.21)
(1.35)
(0.19)
(0.19)
Principal’s working time (hours/week)
21.43
20.60
0.83
0.84
(11.83)
(14.45)
(1.94)
(1.88)
Percent of principal’s time spent on management
74.06
53.64
20.42
20.09
(27.18)
(27.74)
(4.12)
(3.75)
Index of good practices (PCA)
0.41
−0.00
0.41
0.40
(0.64)
(1.00)
(0.12)
(0.12)
Observations
93
92
185
185
Notes: This table presents the mean and standard error of the mean (in parentheses) for the control (column 1) and 
treatment (column 2) groups, as well as the difference between treatment and control (column 3), and the differ-
ence taking into account the randomization design (i.e., including “pair” fixed effects) in column 4. Intuitive score is 
measured using Agor’s (1989) instrument and time management profile using Schermerhorn et al.’s (2011) instru-
ment. The index of good practices is the first component of a principal component analysis of the variables in online 
Appendix Table A.12. The index is normalized to have mean zero and standard deviation of 1 in the control group. 
Standard errors are clustered at the school level.


--- PAGE 24 ---
387
ROMERO ET AL.: OUTSOURCING EDUCATION
VOL. 110 NO. 2
To study teacher behavior, we conducted unannounced spot checks of teacher 
attendance and collected student reports of teacher behavior (see panels A and B in 
Table 8). Also, during these spot checks we used the Stallings classroom observa-
tion instrument to study teacher time use and classroom management (see panel C 
in Table 8).
Teachers in PSL schools are 20 percentage points (­  p-value ​<  0.001​) more likely 
to be in school during a spot check (from a base of 40 percent) and the uncon-
ditional probability of a teacher being in a classroom increases by 15 percentage 
points (­  p-value ​<  0.001​). Our spot checks align with student reports on teacher 
behavior. According to students, teachers in PSL schools are 7.5 percentage points 
(­ p-value  ​<  0.001​) less likely to have missed school the previous week. Students in 
PSL schools also report that teachers are 6.6 percentage points (­  p-value 0.011) less 
likely to hit them.
Classroom observations also show changes in teacher behavior and pedagogical 
practices. Teachers in PSL schools are 15 percentage points (­ p-value 0.0027) more 
likely to engage in either active instruction (e.g., teacher engaging students through 
lecture or discussion) or passive instruction (e.g., students working in their seat 
while the teacher monitors progress) and 25 percentage points (­ p-value ​<  0.001​) 
Table 8—ITT Treatment Effects on Teacher Behavior 
Treatment
Control
Difference
Difference (FE)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A. Spot checks (observations = 185)
Percent on schools’ campus
60.32
40.38
19.94
19.79
(23.10)
(25.20)
(3.56)
(3.48)
Percent in classroom
47.02
31.42
15.60
15.37
(26.65)
(25.04)
(3.80)
(3.62)
Panel B. Student reports (observations = 185)
Teacher missed school previous week (percent)
17.72
25.12
−7.41
−7.53
(10.79)
(14.93)
(1.92)
(1.95)
Teacher never hits students (percent)
54.73
48.20
6.52
6.59
(18.76)
(17.07)
(2.64)
(2.53)
Teacher helps outside the classroom (percent)
50.02
46.59
3.42
3.56
(18.24)
(18.01)
(2.67)
(2.28)
Panel C. Classroom observations (observations = 185)
Instruction (active + passive) (percent of class time)
49.68
35.00
14.68
14.51
(32.22)
(37.08)
(5.11)
(4.70)
Classroom management (percent class time)
19.03
8.70
10.34
10.25
(20.96)
(14.00)
(2.62)
(2.73)
Teacher off-task (percent class time)
31.29
56.30
−25.01
−24.77
(37.71)
(42.55)
(5.91)
(5.48)
Student off-task (percent class time)
50.41
47.14
3.27
2.94
(33.51)
(38.43)
(5.30)
(4.59)
Notes: This table presents the mean and standard error of the mean (in parentheses) for the control (column 2) and 
treatment (column 1) groups, as well as the difference between treatment and control (column 3), and the difference 
taking into account the randomization design (i.e., including “pair” fixed effects) in column 4. Panel A presents data 
from spot checks conducted by our survey teams in the middle of a school day. Panel B presents data from our panel 
of students where we asked them about their teachers’ behavior. Panel C presents data from classroom observa-
tions. If the school was not in session during a regular school day we mark all teachers not on campus as absent and 
teachers and students as off-task in the classroom observation. Online Appendix Table A.11 has the results without 
imputing values for schools not in session. Standard errors are clustered at the school level.


--- PAGE 25 ---
388
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
FEBRUARY 2020
less likely to be ­off-task.28 Although these are considerable improvements, the treat-
ment group is still far off the Stallings, Knight, and Markham (2014) good practice 
benchmark of 85 percent of total class time used for instruction, and below the 
average time spent on instruction across five countries in Latin America (Bruns and 
Luque 2014).
These estimates combine the effects on individual teacher behavior with changes 
to teacher composition. To estimate the treatment effect on teacher attendance over a 
fixed pool of teachers, we perform additional analyses in online Appendix A.1 using 
administrative data (EMIS) to restrict our sample to teachers who worked at the 
school the year before the intervention began (2015-2016). We treat teachers who 
no longer worked at the school in the 2016-2017 school year as (­nonrandom) attrit-
ers and estimate Lee (2009) bounds on the treatment effect. Online Appendix Table 
A.11 shows an ITT treatment effect of 14 percentage points (­  p-value ​<  0.001​) on 
teacher attendance. Importantly, zero is not part of the Lee (2009) bounds for this 
effect. This aligns with previous findings showing that management practices have 
significant effects on worker performance (Bloom, Liang et al. 2015; Bloom, Eifert 
et al. 2013; Bennedsen et al. 2007).
D. Other Outcomes
Student data (panel C of Table 9) and household data (panel A) show that the 
program also increases student and parental satisfaction. Students in PSL are more 
likely to think going to school is fun, and parents with children in PSL schools 
(enrolled in 2015-2016) are 7.5 percentage points (­  p-value 0.022) more likely to be 
satisfied with the education their children are receiving.
Providers are not allowed to charge fees and PSL should be free at all levels, 
including ­early-childhood education (ECE) for which fees are permitted in govern-
ment schools. We interviewed both parents and principals regarding fees. In both 
treatment and control schools parents are more likely to report paying fees than 
schools are to report charging them. The amount parents claim to pay in school 
fees is much higher than the amount schools claim to charge (see panels A and B in 
Table 9). Since principals may be reluctant to disclose the full amount they charge 
parents, especially in primary school (which is nominally free), this discrepancy is 
normal. While the likelihood of charging fees decreases in PSL schools by 26 per-
centage points according to parents and by 19 percentage points according to princi-
pals, 48 percent of parents still report paying some fees in PSL schools.
Providers often provide textbooks and uniforms free of charge to students (see 
Section IA). Indeed, household expenditures on fees, textbooks, and uniforms drop 
(see online Appendix Table A.13 for details). In total, annual household expendi-
tures on children’s education decrease by US$6.6 (­  p-value 0.11). A reduction in 
household expenditure in education reflects a crowding-out response (i.e., parents 
decrease private investment in education as school investments increase). To explore 
whether crowding out goes beyond expenditure we ask parents about engagement in 
their child’s education. However, we see no change on this margin (we summarize 
28 See Stallings, Knight, and Markham (2014) for more details on how active and passive instruction, as well as 
time ­off-task and student engagement, are coded.
