

--- PAGE 1 ---
American Economic Review 2021, 111(6): 1807–1844 
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20191780
1807
Types of Contact: A Field Experiment on 
Collaborative and Adversarial Caste Integration†
By Matt Lowe*
I estimate the effects of collaborative and adversarial intergroup con-
tact. I randomly assigned Indian men from different castes to partici-
pate in cricket leagues or to serve as a control group. League players 
faced variation in collaborative contact, through random assignment 
to homogeneous-caste or mixed-caste teams, and adversarial con-
tact, through random assignment of opponents. Collaborative con-
tact increases cross-caste friendships and efficiency in trade, and 
reduces own-caste favoritism. In contrast, adversarial contact gen-
erally reduces cross-caste interaction and efficiency. League partic-
ipation reduces intergroup differences, suggesting that the positive 
aspects of intergroup contact more than offset the negative aspects in 
this setting. (JEL C93, D83, D91, J15, O15, Z13, Z21)
Social psychologists have long theorized that the effects of intergroup contact 
on prejudice should depend on the type of contact: in particular, contact should 
only reduce prejudice when the integrated groups have common goals, intergroup 
cooperation, equal status, and the support of authorities (Allport 1954, Pettigrew 
1998). This theory is known as the “contact hypothesis.” Over six decades since 
Gordon Allport first formulated the hypothesis, we still lack rigorous evidence on 
whether, and if so, why, the effects of intergroup contact depend on these four scope 
conditions (Paluck, Green, and Green 2018).1 This missing evidence is important: 
policymakers cannot optimally design integrative policies without an understanding 
1 Existing evidence on the importance of the conditions of contact primarily uses only ­cross-study variation. 
For example, in a ­meta-analysis of 515 studies, Pettigrew and Tropp (2006) find that the conditions facilitate, but 
are not necessary for, prejudice reduction. Experimental evidence for the positive effects of contact in general is 
growing, and reviewed in Paluck, Green, and Green (2018). For more background on the contact hypothesis, see 
online Appendix Section B.
* University of British Columbia (email: matt.lowe@ubc.ca). Stefano DellaVigna was the coeditor for this 
article. I am grateful for invaluable guidance from Daron Acemoglu, Abhijit Banerjee, and Frank Schilbach. Many 
thanks also to Nikhil Agarwal, David Atkin, Alex Bartik, Josh Dean, Ben Faber, John Firth, Chishio Furukawa, 
Siddharth George, Bob Gibbons, Rachel Glennerster, Nick Hagerty, Karla Hoff, Simon Jäger, Donghee Jo, Tetsuya 
Kaji, Namrata Kala, Supreet Kaur, Gabriel Kreindler, Calvin Lai, Sara Lowes, Ben Marx, Maddie McKelway, 
Yuhei Miyauchi, Rachael Meager, Ben Olken, Arianna Ornaghi, Betsy Paluck, Thomas Pettigrew, Nishith Prakash, 
Matthew Rabin, Gautam Rao, Otis Reid, Ben Roth, Chris Roth, Carolyn Stein, Linda Tropp, Jeff Weaver, Roman 
Zarate, and four anonymous referees for helpful comments and suggestions. Thanks also to Prianka Bhatia, Yuxiao 
Dai, Lakshay Goyal, Omar Hoda, Shubham Maurya, Mustufa Patel, Mayank Raj, Anna Ranjan, Yashna Shivdasani, 
and especially Azfar Karim, for outstanding research assistance. I am grateful for financial support from the Weiss 
Family Fund, J-PAL Governance Initiative, Center for International Studies, MIT-India, and the Shultz Fund. This 
project received IRB approval from MIT (no.1605556153) and IFMR, and was preregistered in the AEA registry 
with ID #0001856.
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20191780 to visit the article page for additional materials and author  
disclosure statement.


--- PAGE 2 ---
1808
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
of which conditions matter for positive effects of contact and which conditions do 
not. Related, naturally occurring integration frequently has negative effects,2 and 
whether these negative effects could be prevented by ­restructuring the conditions of 
contact is an open question.
This paper uses a field experiment in ­caste-segregated, rural India to study the 
impact of two types of intergroup contact: collaborative, where groups share com-
mon goals, and adversarial, where they instead actively compete. I used cricket, 
the most popular sport in India, to integrate young men from different castes. From 
a sample of 1,261 men, I randomized 800 to play in 8 ­one-month-long cricket 
leagues, and assigned the others to a control group. Of those assigned to play, I 
assigned 35 percent to ­homogeneous-caste teams, and the others to ­mixed-caste 
teams. This randomization gave the first type of ­cross-caste contact: ­collaborative, 
those on the same team shared the common goal of winning matches. Once teams 
formed, I chose opponents randomly to create the second type of ­cross-caste con-
tact: adversarial, those on opposing teams had opposing goals. I measured inter-
group behavioral outcomes one to three weeks after each league ended.
Why should the type of contact matter? Different types of contact provide incen-
tives for different types of intergroup interactions, which may affect outcomes 
through both ­belief-based and ­preference-based channels. Integrated groups with 
common goals have incentives to cooperate with one another: these cooperative 
groups might be ­coworkers on political campaigns or company ­cofounders. In 
contrast, groups with competing goals have incentives to undermine each other, 
as evidenced in ­police-protester interactions and the perceived competition with 
outgroups for places in elite colleges. Consistent with these ideas, in the leagues 
­cross-caste interactions with opponents are 50 percentage points more likely to be 
hostile than ­cross-caste interactions with teammates. These different intergroup 
behaviors may drive belief updating in opposite directions, especially if participants 
make attribution errors (Ross and Nisbett 2011, model in online Appendix Section 
C): wrongly attributing the ­prosocial (hostile) behavior of outgroup teammates 
(opponents) to their caste, rather than to their incentives. Along other dimensions, 
for example beliefs about cricket ability, both types of contact may give similar 
information. I use my first set of outcomes to explore this: measures of willingness 
to interact along two dimensions, as friends and as teammates. Contact may also 
shift deeper preferences through habit formation (Becker and Murphy 1988) or par-
ticipants choosing preferences to rationalize past behavior (Bernheim et al. 2021). 
My second set of outcomes sheds light on this preference channel: measures of caste 
favoritism in the allocation of cricket training. These channels may in turn lead to 
economic efficiency gains or losses. I capture efficiency effects with my third set of 
outcomes, measures of trading behavior and trust.
While I ­preregistered each of these outcomes, my ­preregistration empha-
sizes a different source of variation in the type of contact: the variation driven 
by randomization to more versus less collaborative monetary incentives. Partway 
2 For example, a series of papers find negative political effects of exposure to immigrants and refugees 
(Dahlberg, Edmark, and Lundqvist 2012; Enos 2014; Halla, Wagner, and Zweimüller 2017; Dustmann, Vasiljeva, 
and Piil Damm 2018; Tabellini 2020), with one exception being the lack of correlation between local immigration 
and the rise of the Sweden Democrats (Dal Bó et al. 2018).


--- PAGE 3 ---
1809
LOWE: TYPES OF CONTACT
VOL. 111 NO. 6
into the experiment I realized that an additional useful source of variation existed 
(teammates versus opponents), and later that this variation affected the nature of 
­cross-caste interactions whereas the monetary incentives did not. As a result, I report 
results from both sources of variation in the present paper, though I focus more on 
the “stronger” variation of teammates versus opponents.3
My first set of findings considers players’ willingness to interact. Collaborative 
and adversarial contact have opposite effects on ­self-reported ­cross-caste friend-
ships. Having all ­other-caste teammates instead of none increases the number of 
­other-caste friends by 1, while having all ­other-caste opponents instead of none 
decreases the number of ­other-caste friends by 3.5. These friendship effects are not 
merely driven by direct contact, players becoming friends with teammates and dislik-
ing opponents, or network introductions to the ­preexisting friends of teammates and 
opponents. Furthermore, collaborative contact is no more potent when ­other-caste 
teammates are ­high-ability cricketers: this contact reduces division through working 
together, not winning together. A natural interpretation of this first set of findings, 
though not the only one, is that the two types of contact have opposite effects on 
inferences about the cooperativeness of ­other-caste men.
In contrast with the effects on social interaction, both types of contact reduce 
­ability-based statistical discrimination (Cornell and  Welch 1996; Bohren, Imas, 
and Rosenberg 2019), causing more ­other-caste men to be chosen as teammates for 
a future match with monetary stakes. Additional evidence suggests that this result 
reflects the impact of contact on knowledge about cricket ability. In particular, when 
players choose teammates for an alternative match without a prize for the winner, 
both types of contact have smaller effects, but the adversarial effect falls signifi-
cantly further. Though adversarial contact conveys information about the ability 
of ­other-caste players, it also reduces the desire for ­cross-caste social interaction. 
When the match has no money at stake, the balance shifts towards choosing play-
ers on the basis of desired social interaction, offsetting the informational effect of 
adversarial contact.
My second set of findings consider effects on ­own-caste favoritism in an incentiv-
ized voting exercise. Each player voted to determine which representative from each 
team would receive professional cricket coaching. Collaborative contact reduces 
­own-caste favoritism in voting by up to 33 percent, while adversarial contact has 
imprecise effects. An accounting exercise suggests that the collaborative effect is 
unlikely to be fully explained by generalized ability belief updating, and rather may 
reflect a shift in social preferences.
My third set of findings explore the efficiency effects of contact. Collaborative 
contact increases ­cross-caste trade by up to 21 percent and trade payouts by 18 per-
cent, as measured in a trading exercise where there were gains from ­cross-caste 
trade. This effect corresponds to that of a monetary incentive for ­cross-caste trade 
equivalent to one to two hours of wages. The point estimates for adversarial contact 
are negative, though statistically insignificant. These divergent efficiency effects are 
similar when considering measures of trust, behavior that is measured in the absence 
of ­face-to-face interaction. In particular, adversarial contact reduces levels of trust 
3 I describe differences between the paper and the ­preregistration in detail in online Appendix Section D.


--- PAGE 4 ---
1810
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
significantly more than collaborative contact, which has small or somewhat negative 
effects.
Summarizing the three sets of findings, full collaborative contact increases an 
omnibus index of ­cross-caste behavior by 0.23​σ​ ( ​p  <  0.01​) while full adver-
sarial contact reduces such behaviors by 0.38​σ​ ( ​p  =  0.07​, ­p-value of the 
difference  <  0.01).
In support of the contact hypothesis, contact only improves intergroup relations 
when the groups have common goals. I present some evidence against three mecha-
nisms other than common goals. First, though contact with teammates may be more 
intensive than that with opponents, differences in intensity alone should not lead to 
opposite effects on ­cross-caste behaviors. Second, the two types of contact also dif-
fer in duration: contact with each opponent only lasts for one match, whereas con-
tact with each teammate continues for several matches. However, the ­longer-term 
nature of collaborative contact does not seem to explain impacts: even the ­short-term 
collaborative contact backup players experience has positive effects. Third, neither 
type of contact affects performance or payouts in the matches, suggesting that the 
mechanism does not work through sporting success or income effects.
In the final part of the paper, I discuss three additional results with implications 
for program design and other aspects of the contact hypothesis. First, I show that 
the cricket league intervention reduced intergroup differences overall, demonstrat-
ing that, in this setting, the positive aspects of intergroup contact more than offset 
any negative aspects.4 Those assigned to mixed teams score 0.22​σ​ higher on the 
­cross-caste behavior index than those assigned to the control group. Those assigned 
to ­homogeneous-caste teams are also positively affected, though less so, scoring 
0.09​σ​ higher.
Second, collaborative contact is no less effective when teams are assigned to 
a pay structure which increases ­within-team inequality and competition. A likely 
explanation for this result is that while the collaborative versus adversarial treat-
ments affected intergroup interactions, the competitive pay structure did not. This 
result suggests that Allport’s intergroup cooperation scope condition need not facil-
itate positive effects of contact, at least in a setting where groups already have com-
mon goals.
Third, I show that despite evidence of discrimination of lower castes within each 
team, the positive effects of collaborative contact are similar across castes. Lower 
castes are measurably worse at cricket on average, and are less likely to be selected 
as captains, batters or bowlers, even after controlling for ability. Nevertheless, the 
effects of collaborative contact are similar for upper and lower castes. This shows 
that collaborative contact is effective even in the absence of equal status between 
groups within the situation, giving some evidence against one additional scope con-
dition emphasized by Allport (1954).
4 Other integrative sports programs exist, but evidence on their impact is scarce. Right to Play reaches one 
million children weekly with ­sports-based programs promoting education, health, and peaceful communities, and 
Soccer for Peace uses sport to unite Jews and Arabs in Israel. Ditlmann and Samii (2016) find mixed effects of an 
­interethnic sports program using a ­difference-in-differences design, and while Mousa (2020) studies intergroup 
contact on soccer teams in ­post-conflict Iraq, the design lacks a pure ­non-soccer playing control group to use for 
program evaluation. Otherwise, sport has also been explored as a means of improving intergroup relations through 
shared national experiences (­Depetris-Chauvin, Durante, and Campante 2020).


--- PAGE 5 ---
1811
LOWE: TYPES OF CONTACT
VOL. 111 NO. 6
This paper is the first to systematically test for the effects of different types of 
contact (Paluck, Green, and Green 2018), showing both the importance of common 
goals, and some suggestive evidence against the importance of intergroup cooper-
ation and equal status. Existing empirical tests study one type of contact in isola-
tion (Boisjoly et al. 2006; Enos 2014; Dahl, Kotsadam, and Rooth 2021; Scacco 
and  Warren 2018; Corno, La  Ferrara, and  Burns 2019; Schindler and  Westcott 
2021), or use ­nonrandomized variation in the type of contact (Pettigrew and Tropp 
2006; Dustmann, Vasiljeva, and Piil Damm 2018; Bazzi et al. 2019).5 In a particu-
larly creative example of the former, Rao (2019) shows that integration of rich and 
poor students in Delhi schools increases the ­prosocial behavior of rich students. 
In his case, the contact entails a mix of collaborative and adversarial interactions 
(e.g., through competing on exams). Mousa (2020) also complements my paper, 
showing evidence for the positive effects of collaborative contact in soccer leagues 
in a ­postconflict setting, with the added advantage of ­longer-term outcome measure-
ment. Different to these papers, I investigate the impacts of the two types of contact 
separately.
The second contribution of this paper is to estimate the efficiency effects of con-
tact. A large literature shows that ethnic diversity and ingroup bias affect efficiency 
and allocation (Alesina and Ferrara 2005; Anderson 2011; Hjort 2014; Marx, Pons, 
and Suri 2016). These papers show that ethnic differences have costs; my paper 
is the first to show that the efficiency consequences of integration depend on the 
nature of contact. To do so, I introduce a trading exercise that is cheap to implement, 
portable, and useful for the incentivized measurement of economic networks in the 
absence of naturally occurring data on economic links.
More broadly, this paper complements a large psychology and ­lab-experimental 
literature on the effects of group membership (Tajfel et al. 1971, Goette et al. 2012) 
by showing that team membership can reduce prejudice in a ­real-world setting. Most 
relevant, the Robber’s Cave Experiment of Sherif et al. (1961) randomly assigned 
22 boys to 2 groups at a summer camp, demonstrating both that (i) competition 
between groups for resources leads to conflict, and (ii) common goals between the 
groups reduces conflict. In contrast to my paper, this study involved newly formed 
groups, rather than existing groups in conflict. The latter is more relevant for policy. 
Finally, this paper contributes to a large body of work on caste networks (reviewed 
in Munshi 2019) by exploring not just why these networks matter, but also how they 
form.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section I provides an over-
view of India’s caste system, and motivates the use of cricket leagues as a tool for 
the study of contact. Section II describes the experiment design and outcomes, while 
Section III explores the effects of both types of contact on willingness to interact, 
­own-caste favoritism, and efficiency. Section IV considers alternative explanations 
5 Examples from history also suggest that economic structure can drive ethnic conflict, whether trade com-
plementarities reducing ­Hindu-Muslim violence (Jha 2013) or increased labor market competition promoting 
­anti-semitic acts (Becker and Pascali 2019). One possible mechanism for these effects is that economic structure 
determines the nature of intergroup contact. Otherwise, there is evidence that the type of organizational contact 
(e.g., horizontal versus vertical) affects productivity (­Karaca-Mandic, Maestas, and  Powell 2013; Marx, Pons, 
and Suri 2016).


--- PAGE 6 ---
1812
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
for why the type of contact matters, and Section V considers the three program 
design implications of additional results. Section VI concludes.
I.  Background on Caste and Cricket
A.  Caste: Past and Present
Caste Origins.—The Indian caste system dates back to as far as 1500  BCE. 
According to the Manusmriti, an ancient Hindu legal text, individuals belong to one 
of four ordered social categories, called varnas: Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, 
and Shudras, with the lowest social group, the untouchables, outside of this class 
system altogether. Each of these groups contains hundreds of ­subgroups, called 
jatis, within which Hindus historically must marry. In addition to endogamy, the 
caste system features norms of contact between the groups (e.g., whether food can 
be shared), residential segregation, and traditional occupations (Ghurye 1932, Oh 
2019).
Though the core of the caste system rests with the endogamous jatis, the gov-
ernment categories of General, Other Backwards Castes (OBC), and Scheduled 
Castes/Scheduled Tribes (SC/ST),6 are natural groups to consider when study-
ing discrimination in India (Munshi 2019).7 These groups follow a traditional 
hierarchy, with General above OBC, and OBC above SC/ST. In this paper I use 
“­cross-caste” to refer to interactions between these three groups, and unless stated 
otherwise, all subsequent references to caste refer to one of these three groups.
Discrimination.—Despite decades of illegality under the Indian Constitution, 
discrimination of lower castes continues to be widespread. ­Thirty-nine percent of 
General and OBC households in Uttar Pradesh (24 percent in India), the Indian state 
where I ran the experiment, practice untouchability (Desai, Vanneman, and National 
Council of Applied Economic Research 2011), limiting their physical interactions 
with lower castes with the aim of remaining “unpolluted.” Despite persistent dis-
crimination, there is evidence that the relative economic status of low castes has 
improved in recent decades (Hnatkovska, Lahiri, and Paul 2012).
General Segregation.—Castes are segregated through marriage, geography, and 
social networks. Though many castes often reside in the same village, geographical 
segregation results from castes living in separate hamlets. Reflecting these living 
arrangements, though each jati makes up on average 6 percent of a village’s popula-
tion across major Indian states, roughly 50 percent of food transfers and loans come 
from within the same jati (Munshi and Rosenzweig 2015). ­Cross-caste interactions 
that exist are often adversarial: 50 percent of households in Uttar Pradesh report that 
there is some or a lot of conflict between jatis in their village (Desai, Vanneman, 
and National Council of Applied Economic Research 2011).
6 Erstwhile untouchables, and some others, were classified as Scheduled Castes (SC), with indigenous tribes 
classified as Scheduled Tribes (ST). Only 1.6 percent of participants in this study are STs.
7 To focus on caste and not religion, I only considered villages with few or no Muslims for the experiment. In 
practice, only 2.9 percent of participants were Muslim. These participants could still be assigned a caste given that 
Muslim communities are also formally classified as General, OBC, or SC/ST.


--- PAGE 7 ---
1813
LOWE: TYPES OF CONTACT
VOL. 111 NO. 6
Study Segregation.—Online Appendix Figure A1 illustrates the social segrega-
tion at baseline for two of the eight league locations. Average ­caste-based homoph-
ily (following Jackson 2011) is 1.92: study participants are roughly twice as likely 
to form friendships with a participant from the same caste than with a participant 
in general.8 In addition to homophily, there is hierarchy: General castes have more 
friends from OBC than SC/ST, while SC/ST have more friends from OBC than 
General castes.
Salience.—Though we might expect caste tension to be weaker among the young 
than the old, qualitative reports from this study suggest that caste remains highly 
salient even among the young (online Appendix  Section E). Among many such 
examples, one General caste participant said “I will assist those from my own caste, 
and beat the chamars [a Scheduled Caste jati]. My whole day goes bad when I see 
face of a chamar.” Similarly, one SC/ST participant, upon seeing the photos of 
General caste participants, asked the surveyor to “scroll through these Tiwaris and 
Pandits [General castes] quickly.”
B.  An Introduction to Cricket
What Is Cricket?—The experiment used cricket, a ­team-based, ­bat-and-ball 
sport, as a means of integrating men from different caste groups. Cricket is simi-
lar in structure to baseball. Each team usually comprises 11 players, though in the 
experiment each team consisted of only 5 players, to maximize statistical power. 
Each team takes turns to either field or bat. In the experiment, each match lasted 40 
minutes on average. When fielding, the team nominates one player to be the bowler 
and one to be the ­wicket-keeper (similar to the pitcher and catcher, respectively, in 
baseball). The bowler throws the ball toward the wickets, which are a set of three 
wooden stumps (online Appendix Figure A2). The ­wicket-keeper stands behind the 
wickets ready to receive the ball. The three remaining team members play the role of 
fielders, working together to collect the ball. When batting, only two members of the 
team play at any one time, both as batsmen. The batsmen attempt to score as many 
“runs” as possible, which they do by hitting the ball and then running between the 
wickets, or by hitting the ball sufficiently far (rolling past or flying in the air beyond 
the “boundary”) such that they score a 4 or a 6. The fielding team attempts to mini-
mize the number of runs the batting team scores by, for example, hitting the wickets 
when bowling (meaning the batsman at that end is “dismissed”).
Why Cricket?—The nature of cricket provides several advantages for this study. 
First, popularity across castes makes high participation possible, mitigating selec-
tion concerns: among study participants, 81 percent play cricket at least two times 
per week. Second, cricket tournaments are common in the study area, making the 
intervention naturalistic: at baseline, 38 percent of study participants were aware 
of a local cricket tournament held in the past 12 months. Third, features of cricket 
make contact treatments natural: teams have to be formed, and teams must face 
8 For comparison, Jackson (2011) finds ­race-based homophily in US high schools to be lower, at 1.4 on average.


--- PAGE 8 ---
1814
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
opponents.9 The collaborative nature of sport in general was apparent to Gordon 
Allport, who wrote in The Nature of Prejudice (1954, p. 276):
Only the type of contact that leads people to do things together is likely 
to result in changed attitudes. The principle is clearly illustrated in the 
­multi-ethnic athletic team. Here the goal is all important: the ethnic com-
position of the team is irrelevant. It is the cooperative striving for the goal 
that engenders solidarity.
Types of Contact in Cricket.—Players on the same team share the common goal 
of winning the match, and must collaborate to achieve this goal. To succeed when 
batting, batting partners must communicate, discussing when and how much to 
run between the wickets. When fielding, all team members are on the field, and 
to succeed they must cooperate with the bowler and ­wicket-keeper, who call to 
receive the ball from where it was hit. At ­half-time, each team gathers together for 
a team talk, ostensibly to strategize how to play in the second half of the match. In 
addition, teams achieve their common goal by playing competitively against their 
opposition: bowling fast, batting hard, and challenging decisions that the umpire 
(referee) makes in the other team’s favor. These types of contact generate incentives 
for different types of interactions: while interactions with ­other-caste teammates are 
more frequent than interactions with ­other-caste opponents (columns ­1–5, online 
Appendix Table A1), conditional on interacting, interactions with ­other-caste team-
mates are 50 percentage points less likely to be hostile (column 6).
II.  Experiment Design
A.  Recruitment and Baseline Activities
Site Selection.—I selected 8 gram panchayats10 (GPs) near Varanasi, Uttar 
Pradesh, from among 100 GPs visited by the field team.11 The selected GPs satisfied 
several desirable criteria, including: the presence of ­caste-segregated hamlets, a sup-
portive elected GP leader, roughly equal caste proportions, and an available cricket 
field. I organized one cricket league per GP, with the matches played from January 
to July 2017. The experiment design and detailed timeline for a given league is 
detailed in Figure 1. The subsequent details in this section track this timeline closely.
Recruitment and Baseline.—In each GP, surveyors spent the first six days recruit-
ing men aged 14 to 30 to play in the upcoming cricket league. We advertised the 
basic details of the leagues using posters (online Appendix Figure A3), and via 
direct contact from Sarathi Development Foundation (our NGO partner) staff. The 
information made clear that teams would be chosen randomly by the organizers 
and not by the participants themselves. By targeting particular hamlets, we kept 
9 The idea that such ­cricket-based contact might unite castes is even present in Indian culture: in the famous 
Hindi film, Lagaan (2001), villagers are persuaded by their desire to win to allow an untouchable to play on their 
team.
10 Gram panchayats are local administrative units comprising several villages.
11 See online Appendix Section F for additional, but less essential, experiment design details.


--- PAGE 9 ---
1815
LOWE: TYPES OF CONTACT
VOL. 111 NO. 6
recruitment roughly equally balanced across the three caste categories.12 Men who 
expressed interest completed a baseline survey (for summary statistics, see online 
Appendix Table A2) and were informed that their ­sign-up was not complete until 
their cricket ability was tested. I allowed men to sign up to be players, umpires, 
or both. Seven signed up to be umpires exclusively. I used these men as umpires, 
but not as part of the sample for which I measured outcomes. Of the 1,261 who 
completed both the baseline and ability testing as players, 281 also signed up to be 
umpires, of which 156 umpired at least one match.
Study Construal.—I minimized references to caste in the survey instruments to 
avoid priming and social desirability bias. In this spirit, surveyors told participants 
during baseline that “we are recruiting men interested in playing in cricket tourna-
ments for money. Our aim is to use cricket tournaments to bring the community 
together, and to study how cooperative and competitive men are in rural India.” 
This framing appears to have been successful: according to daily surveyor debriefs, 
participants very rarely voiced suspicions that the study was designed to understand 
caste relations.
Ability Testing.—Following the six days of recruitment, surveyors spent six days 
testing the cricket ability of each participant. Cricket ability was measured along 
12 Of the 1,261 participants, 32.7 percent, 35 percent, and 32.3 percent were from General, OBC, and SC/ST 
castes respectively.
Figure 1.  Experiment Design and Timeline
Notes: The figure shows the roughly 60-day time line for each league. The experiment ran in three phases with two 
leagues running in parallel during the first phase and three during each of the latter phases. ​N​ is the sample size per 
league, ​​N​tot​​ is the overall sample size summed across all eight leagues. Text under blue brackets refers to survey 
instruments. The order of events in the figure reflects exactly the order of events in each league, while the day num-
bers for each event are approximate given some slight variation between leagues.
Day 1
Day 12
Final recruits:
N = 140 to 177
[Ntot = 1,261]
League players:
N = 100
[Ntot = 800]
7 homogeneous 
teams:
N = 35 [Ntot = 280]
Backup players:
N = 40 to 77
[Ntot = 461]
13 mixed teams:
N = 65 [Ntot = 520]
League
80 matches
Random order
caste-wise
General
OBC
SC/ST
…
Day 15
…
…
…
…
…
…
Randomization
• Assignment to league/teams/backups  
 illustrated above
• Teams randomized 50:50 to   
    team/individual pay
• Match schedule randomized using
 Bollobás’ method
• Order of play randomized
Treatment
assignment
phone
call
Match 
observation
Social 
networks
Baseline, 
ability 
testing
Endline-1
Endline-2
…
Day 60
Day 16
Day 18
Day 41 Day 44
Day 48
Day 53
Award 
ceremony
Trading 
period


--- PAGE 10 ---
1816
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
three dimensions: bowling, batting, and fielding. For bowling, participants bowled 
six balls toward the wickets, and a surveyor measured the speed using speed guns. 
For batting, a surveyor bowled six balls toward the wickets, and the participant 
attempted to hit each ball. The surveyor recorded whether each ball was hit, and if 
so whether it was hit sufficiently far to score either a 4 or a 6. For fielding, a surveyor 
threw six balls high in the air toward the participant. The surveyor recorded how 
many balls were successfully caught. The ability measures are strongly predictive 
of league performance, as shown in Section VC. For some of the analysis, I create 
an ­individual-level ability index as the average across three standardized measures: 
maximum bowling speed, number of 4s or 6s when batting, and number of catches 
when fielding.
Social Networks.—Once the participants were finalized, I administered a short 
social network survey. Each participant was shown a list of the full names and pho-
tos of all other participants and asked which they considered to be friends. Though 
caste cannot be visibly discerned, it is usually signaled strongly by the last name a 
person uses. When participants are asked to guess the caste category of a hypotheti-
cal name at end-line, they correctly identify the name as belonging to the same or a 
different caste 80 percent of the time. This figure represents a lower bound on caste 
recognition during the experiment itself, since beyond observing last names, par-
ticipants may recognize the photo and correctly infer caste through knowing what 
hamlet the individual lives in. Due to time constraints, 93 percent of the 1,261 par-
ticipants completed the social network survey prior to treatment assignment.
B.  Randomization
League Assignment.—In each of the 8 locations, I randomly assigned 100 partici-
pants to play in the cricket league. I stratified this randomization on caste and selected 
a ­well-balanced draw from among 100 ­re-randomizations to avoid other chance imbal-
ances (following Banerjee, Chassang, and Snowberg 2017, further details in online 
Appendix Section G). I assigned the remaining participants to the control group.
Backup Protocol.—Cricket matches are difficult to play without a full roster of 
players. Since 100 percent match attendance could not be guaranteed, control par-
ticipants served as backup players. To preserve a comparison group with very few 
matches actually played, I followed a strict backup protocol. I assigned a priority 
number randomly to each backup, within each caste. If a particular player could not 
attend one of his matches, surveyors called a backup player from the same caste 
in priority order. This protocol ensured that only ­high-priority backups played fre-
quently: the three ­highest-priority backups played 7.4 matches on average, while 
the remaining backups played far fewer (online Appendix Figure A4). This protocol 
has an additional advantage: the nature of the treatment for ­high-priority backups (in 
particular, the fact that they cycle in and out of different teams) helps me distinguish 
between different explanations for the results in Section IVB.
Team Assignment.—For each of the 8 leagues, I randomly assigned the 100 
league players to 20 teams of 5 players each. Thirty-five percent of the players 


--- PAGE 11 ---
1817
LOWE: TYPES OF CONTACT
VOL. 111 NO. 6
were randomly assigned to ­homogeneous-caste teams, making 7 out of 20 teams 
­homogeneous-caste. I pooled and randomly ordered the remaining players. Each 
sequence of 5 then formed a ­mixed-caste team.
Incentives.—The survey team paid each player a cash incentive based on his 
cricket performance following each match. The exact type of monetary incentive 
was randomized. Of the 20 teams participating in each league, I randomized 10 
teams to receive Individual Pay and the remaining 10 to receive Team Pay. Surveyors 
paid players on Individual Pay teams according to individual performance (giving 
­on-team inequality) while players on Team Pay teams were paid based on team 
performance (giving ­on-team equality). The variation in incentives allows a test 
of an additional Allport (1954) condition: that of intergroup cooperation. Team 
Pay increases intergroup cooperation on each team, by making own pay depend 
positively on the performance of teammates. In contrast, Individual Pay increases 
competition, giving incentives to “jockey for position” to ensure enough ­play-time 
to make money. If intergroup cooperation matters in the way that Allport (1954) 
hypothesized, we would expect the positive effects of collaborative contact to be 
greater for teams that receive Team Pay.
Match Schedule.—I scheduled each team to play eight matches, never playing 
the same team more than once. This scheduling problem is identical to the network 
problem of choosing a random simple regular graph. I randomly chose a graph for 
each league using an existing algorithm, Bollobás’ “pairing method” (see online 
Appendix Section G for details). The algorithm generated an adjacency matrix for 
each league, representing which teams were to play which. With these matrices I 
scheduled 80 matches per league, with the matches randomly ordered. The random-
ness of the match schedule ensured that a given player’s exposure to other castes as 
opponents was also random.13 Together, the assignment to teams and random match 
schedule created significant variation in collaborative and, albeit less so, adversarial 
­cross-caste contact (online Appendix Figure A5). This difference in variation results 
in much lower powered statistical tests for adversarial contact than for collaborative 
contact.14 I counter this limitation somewhat by also estimating overall effects on an 
omnibus index of ­cross-caste behavior (Section IIID).
C.  Implementation Period
Treatment Announcement and League.—During the ­two-day period following 
randomization, surveyors phoned each participant to explain their treatment assign-
ment. Following these phone calls, each league ran for roughly three-and-a-half 
weeks, with match attendance averaging 76 percent. One surveyor observed each 
13 More precisely, it is random conditional on the caste composition of his own team. For example, if a player 
has four ­other-caste men on his team, he is less likely to be exposed to ­other-caste opponents than a player with only 
one ­other-caste man on his team. All analysis of adversarial contact effects below controls for ­on-team ­cross-caste 
exposure.
14 I faced a trade-off between naturalism and statistical power when creating variation in adversarial contact. For 
example, I could have increased variation in adversarial contact (and statistical power) by having each team play 
the same opposing team eight times. Instead, I erred on the side of naturalism by having each team play a given 
opposing team only once.


--- PAGE 12 ---
1818
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
match and recorded interactions between players using the Match Observation sur-
vey (as referenced already in online Appendix Table A1).
Recognizing Caste.—To avoid explicit references to caste, participants were not 
directly told the caste group of their teammates and opponents. However, several 
features of the experiment enable caste to be identified implicitly. First, the full 
names and father’s names of teammates were conveyed over the phone as part of the 
treatment announcement, strongly signaling the caste of each teammate. Second, 
close interaction with teammates on the pitch, including mandatory team talks, gives 
opportunities for teammates to learn each other’s caste. Third, the catchment area 
for each league is sufficiently small that players can recognize their teammates and 
opponents, even if they are not friends; indeed, when players are asked on the phone 
whether they know of their randomly assigned teammates, 39 percent say yes when 
the teammate is from the same caste, while still 27 percent say yes when the team-
mate is from a different caste. The corresponding figures for baseline friendships 
are 15 percent and 4 percent, suggesting that even though participants are far more 
likely to be friends with members of their own caste, they are not that much more 
likely to know them than participants from other castes. Fourth, during the matches 
the full names of bowlers are called out whenever the bowler is to be changed. Fifth, 
spectators at the matches (17 on average) frequently call out the names of players, 
and sometimes refer to players using caste slurs.
Outcome Measurement.—I measured three classes of outcomes during two 
end-line surveys (­Endline-1 and ­Endline-2) one to three weeks after the com-
pletion of each cricket league: (i) willingness to interact; (ii) caste favoritism; 
and (iii) efficiency. The relatively ­short-run outcome measurement is a key lim-
itation of this study. These outcomes were measured for all participants, except 
­own-caste favoritism, which was not measured for the control group due to time 
constraints. I summarize the measurement in Table 1, and in full, together with the 
results, in Section III.
D.  Empirical Specification
To test for the effects of the two types of contact, I focus on the subsample of 
participants randomly assigned to play in the leagues (​N  =  800​), and primarily use 
the following empirical specification:
(1)      ​​y​icl​  =  ​α​cl​ + β ​Prop. Oth. Caste on Team​icl​ 
	
+ γ ​Prop. Oth. Caste of Opponents​icl​ + η ​X​icl​ + ​ε​icl​​ ,
where ​​y​icl​​ denotes outcome ​y​ for participant ​i​ from caste ​c  ∈  {General, OBC,  
SC/ST}​ playing in league ​l​, ​​α​cl​​ are ­caste-by-league fixed effects since these were 
used as strata for the randomization to teams, and ​​ε​icl​​ is the error term. The term ​​X​icl​​ 
is a vector of baseline covariates, detailed in the next subsection. The sample size 
varies slightly across outcomes given differing attrition for ­Endline-1 and ­Endline-2, 
and logistical constraints preventing us from measuring all outcomes for the final 


--- PAGE 13 ---
1819
LOWE: TYPES OF CONTACT
VOL. 111 NO. 6
few respondents. To allow for correlated shocks within teams, I cluster standard 
errors at the ­team-level.
The collaborative contact treatment is Prop. Oth. Caste on ​Team​icl​  ∈  {0,  0.25, 
0.5,  0.75,  1}​, which is the proportion of player ​i​’s four teammates that belong to 
a different caste. The parameter ​β​ gives the causal effect of a player having all 
­other-caste teammates instead of none. The adversarial contact treatment is  
Prop. Oth. Caste of ​Opponents​icl​​, which ranges from 0.35 to 0.975. In this case, 
given the linearity assumption and extrapolation beyond the support of the vari-
able, ​γ​ identifies the causal effect of a player having all ­other-caste opponents 
instead of none.
To test for the effects of league participation, I use the full participant sample 
(​N  =  1, 261​) and the following empirical specification:
(2)      ​​y​icl​  =  ​a​cl​ + ​ϕ​1​ ​Homog. Team​icl​
	
+ ​ϕ​2​ ​Mixed Team​icl​ + ​ϕ​3​ ​High Backup​icl​ + θ ​X​icl​ + ​e​icl​​ ,
which compares the ­low-priority backups which played few matches (the omitted 
group) with the ­high-priority backups (Backup Priority ​Number​icl​  ≤  3​), those 
assigned to ­homogeneous-caste teams (Prop. Oth. Caste on ​Team​icl​  =  0​), and 
Table 1—Description of Main Outcomes
Exercise
Brief Description
Main Outcome
Concept
Social interaction
Participants scroll through photos and full 
names of all other participants, first selecting 
those who are friends or with whom they 
would like to spend time, second selecting 
those who are friends.
Number of  
other-caste 
men selected
Willingness to 
interact socially
Team formation
Participants again scroll through all other 
participants, this time making incentivized 
choices of four future teammates, first for 
a match with monetary stakes, second for a 
match without monetary stakes.
Number of 
­other-caste 
men selected
Willingness 
to interact 
productively
Voting
League players vote on which players from 
other teams get to go on a field trip for pro-
fessional coaching, by ranking the players of 
these other teams from 1 to 5.
Vote ranking given 
to other players 
matched to caste
Caste favoritism
Trading
Participants receive two ­mismatched goods 
(e.g., two ­left-handed gloves) and have 
several days to find other participants to trade 
with. One-half of the participants receive 
obfuscated monetary incentives to trade with 
someone from a different caste.
Whether traded 
with someone from 
a different caste
Efficiency
Trust
Participants play a standard trust game 
with three partners, one from each caste of 
General, OBC, and SC/ST. Participants can 
send up to Rs. 50 to partners, any amount 
sent is tripled, and partners can decide how 
much to return. Participants also ­self-report 
whether they think that most people can be 
trusted.
Amount transferred 
in trust game; Whether 
think that most people 
can be trusted
Efficiency
 


--- PAGE 14 ---
1820
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
those assigned to ­mixed-caste teams (Prop. Oth. Caste on ​Team​icl​  >  0​). I cluster 
standard errors at the ­team-level for those assigned to play in the leagues, and at the 
­participant-level otherwise.
E.  Randomization and Implementation Checks
Balance checks suggest that the randomization was successful. For the effects 
of contact (online Appendix Table  A3), 2 of 17 coefficients not affected by 
­re-randomization (for age and whether in school) are statistically significant at the 
10 percent level for the checks on the full sample (panel A), and likewise for the 
checks with the most restrictive analysis sample: participants with complete data 
for all end-line outcomes (panel B). There are no statistically significant effects for 
the most important variable: the number of ­other-caste friends listed in the social 
network survey (column 1). That said, the signs go in the direction of the hypoth-
esized effects, with a positive coefficient for collaborative contact and a negative 
coefficient for adversarial contact.
The balance checks for the program participation specification are similar 
(online Appendix Table A4), though ­high-priority backups have significantly more 
­other-caste friends (column 1). Given this imbalance, and the similar concern in 
online Appendix Table A3, I control for the number of ­other-caste friendships at 
baseline throughout. In particular, since 7 percent of the 1,261 participants did 
not complete the social network survey prior to treatment assignment, I control 
for two baseline covariates: a dummy variable equal to one if the social network 
survey was not completed, and the number of ­other-caste friendships at baseline, 
set to −99 if missing. Given that baseline ­other-caste friendships are predictive of 
end-line intergroup behaviors, this approach also increases precision. In addition, 
I control throughout for the five variables used for ­re-randomization (following 
Bruhn and McKenzie 2009): age, whether in school, whether would volunteer, 
number of 4s or 6s in the batting test, and maximum speed in the bowling test.
Attrition is low at 6.8 percent, and not statistically significantly affected by either 
collaborative or adversarial contact. This lack of selective attrition holds for the full 
sample and for each caste separately (columns 1 to 4, online Appendix Table A5). 
Similarly, there are no statistically significant effects on the number of matches 
attended, for the full sample or ­caste-wise (columns 5 to 8). Having ­other-caste 
teammates is not a deterrent to playing.
III.  The Effects of Collaborative and Adversarial Contact
A.  Willingness to Interact
Social Interaction.—During ­Endline-2 participants scrolled through a ­randomly 
ordered list of all other participants in their location, seeing each participant’s photo 
and full name. Surveyors asked them to select the participants that they either 
consider friends or would like to spend time with in the future (Want to Interact). 
Restricting responses to the people they listed, surveyors then asked them to select 
those they considered friends (Friends). By matching selections to the caste of each 
person, I calculated the total number of ­other-caste men selected for each question. 


--- PAGE 15 ---
1821
LOWE: TYPES OF CONTACT
VOL. 111 NO. 6
Though ­self-reported, selections are highly predictive of subsequent actual trading 
behavior (online Appendix Table A6).
Analysis.—Collaborative and adversarial contact have opposite effects on 
­cross-caste friendships (Figure 2; panel A of Table 2).15 Collaborative contact has 
a positive effect on desired future interaction with participants from other castes 
and ­cross-caste friendships. On average, those in ­homogeneous-caste teams want to 
interact with 7.1 ­other-caste (12.1 ­own-caste) participants in future, and are friends 
15 These malleable friendships are consistent with evidence that people, and especially the below-median age, 
form social attachments easily (Sherif et al. 1961, Baumeister and Leary 1995). Consistent with this, below-median 
age participants are more likely to form friendships as a result of collaborative contact, and less likely to lose them 
as a result of adversarial contact (online Appendix Table A7).
Figure 2.  Collaborative and Adversarial Contact Have Opposite Effects 
on Demand for ­Cross-Caste Social Interaction
Notes: The ­left-hand-side panels show the effects of collaborative contact, while the ­right-hand-side panels show 
the effects of adversarial contact. The top panel outcome is the number of ­other-caste men who the participant con-
siders friends or wants to spend time with. The bottom panel outcome is the number of ­other-caste men who the 
participant considers friends (a subset of the top panel outcome). The estimated ​β​ and ​γ​ from equation (1) along 
with each standard error and ­p-value is shown, as well as a dashed line showing this linear fit. The bubbles in each 
panel plot fitted values from a ­semi-linear specification that parallels equation (1), but replaces the relevant contact 
variable with a set of dummy variables for the contact variable belonging to different bins (Cattaneo et al. 2019). 
The panels visualize the fitted value for each bin, holding all other variables at their mean values. The figure then 
controls for the same covariates and strata fixed effects as in the regression tables. The bins for collaborative con-
tact are the five possible values (0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1). The bins for adversarial contact are ten quantile bins. The 
bubble size reflects the sample size in each bin.
 β = 2.2
(0.67)
p < 0.01
 γ = −7.9
(2.7)
p < 0.01
6
8
10
12
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
6
8
10
12
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
1
2
3
4
5
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
1
2
3
4
5
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
Number other-caste
want to interact
Proportion of teammates 
from other caste
Proportion of opponents 
from other caste
Proportion of teammates 
from other caste
Collaborative
Adversarial
Proportion of opponents 
from other caste
Number other-caste
friends
Number other-caste
want to interact
Number other-caste
friends
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
 β = 1
(0.34)
p < 0.01
 γ = −3.5
(1.7)
p = 0.04


--- PAGE 16 ---
1822
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
with 3.1 (7 ­own-caste). Moving from a ­homogeneous-caste team to a team with four 
­other-caste men increases desired ­cross-caste interactions by 2.2 (31 percent), and 
­cross-caste friendships by 1 (32 percent). In contrast, adversarial contact has a neg-
ative effect on these outcomes, larger in magnitude than the effect of collaborative 
contact. An increase in adversarial exposure from the least (35 percent) to the most 
(97.5 percent) leads to 2.2 fewer ­other-caste friends. For each outcome, the equiva-
lence of the effects of collaborative and adversarial contact can be rejected at least 
at the 95 percent significance level.
While the effects of collaborative contact are not mediated by the ability of 
players exposed to (in contrast to Carrell, Hoekstra, and West 2019), ­higher-ability 
­other-caste opponents significantly reduce the negative effects of adversarial con-
tact (panel A of Table 2, column 3). Given that teams with higher ability play-
ers also win more matches (as I show in Section IVC), this suggests firstly that 
shared victories do not enhance the effects of collaborative contact. Second, losing 
Table 2—Ability Mediates Adversarial, but Not Collaborative, Contact
Want to interact
Friends
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A.  Number of other-caste participants
Prop. Oth. Caste on Team
2.17
1.03
1.22
(0.67)
(0.34)
(0.35)
Prop. Oth. Caste of Opponents
−7.90
−3.49
−2.93
(2.75)
(1.71)
(1.71)
Prop. Oth. Caste on Team × Oth. Caste Team Ability
0.29
(0.65)
Prop. Oth. Caste of Opponents 
  × Oth. Caste Opponent Ability
6.71
(2.46)
Caste × league fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Outcome mean
7.9
3.5
3.5
p-value (collaborative  =  adversarial)
0.00058
0.012
Panel B.  Number of own-caste participants
Prop. Own Caste on Team
0.97
0.46
(0.53)
(0.39)
Prop. Own Caste of Opponents
4.52
2.38
(2.36)
(1.85)
Caste × league fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Outcome mean
12
6.6
p-value (collaborative  =  adversarial)
0.14
0.31
Observations
770
770
770
Notes: Standard errors clustered at ­team-level. Column 1 outcome is number of other/­­own-
caste participants who the respondent considers friends or wants to spend time with. Column 2 
and  3 outcome is number of other/­own-caste participants who the respondent considers 
friends. Oth. Caste Team Ability is the average ability index across all ­other-caste players in 
a given player’s team (set equal to zero in the case of no ­other-caste players), where the abil-
ity index is the average across three standardized baseline ability measures: maximum bowl-
ing speed, number of 4s/6s when batting, and number of catches when fielding. Oth. Caste 
Opponent Ability is the average ability index across all ­other-caste opponents. Prop. Own 
Caste on Team is equal to 1 minus Prop. Oth. Caste on Team. Prop. Own Caste of Opponents 
is equal to 1 minus Prop. Oth. Caste of Opponents. Panel A regressions control for number 
of ­other-caste friends at baseline (and dummy for missing), and the five variables used for 
­re-randomization. Panel B is the same, except number of ­own-caste friends instead of number 
of ­other-caste friends.


--- PAGE 17 ---
1823
LOWE: TYPES OF CONTACT
VOL. 111 NO. 6
matches to ­other-caste opponents is not likely driving the negative adversarial 
effects. Instead, it appears that ­high-ability ­other-caste opponents earn respect. 
Together, these results suggest that the nature of collaboration and competition 
during the matches determines the effects of contact, rather than the outcomes of 
those matches. Put another way, collaborative contact is about working together, 
not winning together.
The effects of contact are different when I consider instead exposure to people 
from the same caste (panel B of Table 2). Collaborative contact with ­own-caste 
participants has a small positive effect on ­own-caste desired future interaction 
and friendships: the magnitudes are roughly ­one-half of the size of the ­cross-caste 
collaborative contact effects. This result is consistent with diminishing returns to 
contact: social networks are caste segregated to begin with, giving less scope for 
forming new network links with members of the same caste.
­Own-caste adversarial contact has marginally significant positive effects: the 
opposite of the ­cross-caste effect. The point estimate of 4.5 for desired future inter-
action implies that for every 10 additional ­own-caste opponents faced, a participant 
wants to spend time with 1.1 more ­own-caste men in future. In this context, adver-
sarial contact alone does not create friction, but intergroup adversarial contact does. 
Competing against ingroup members has a fundamentally different effect than com-
peting against outgroup members.
Individuals versus Groups.—To test whether the effects of contact extend 
beyond those played with, I explore effects of collaborative contact on friend-
ships with ­non-teammates, and effects of adversarial contact on friendships with 
­non-opponents.
For the effects of collaborative contact, I define the outcome as the percentage 
of ­other-caste friends among those assigned to play on other teams. This defini-
tion excludes all backup players, since some backup players will play as substitutes 
on the participant’s team. No one in this set of people played in a match with the 
respondent. Effects of collaborative contact on friendships with these people are 
then not driven by direct contact as teammates.16
For the effects of adversarial contact, I define the outcome as the percentage of 
­other-caste friends among the 205 backups who played zero matches. Since they did 
not play, any effects of adversarial contact on desired interaction with these people 
cannot be driven by direct contact as opponents.17
Both collaborative and adversarial contact effects extend to the outgroup as a 
whole. Collaborative contact has a positive effect on desired future interaction and 
friendships with ­other-caste men in other teams ( p  =  0.11, 0.04 respectively, Figure 
3). Adversarial contact again has negative effects ( p  =  0.03, 0.26 respectively). 
16 Furthermore, by defining the outcome as the percentage of this set of ­other-caste participants listed as friends, 
I adjust for the fact that the size of this set differs systematically by treatment. For example, those with four 
­other-caste teammates have four fewer ­other-caste participants in the relevant set than those with zero ­other-caste 
teammates. If collaborative contact does not matter, these two types of treated players will select on average the 
same percentage (but a different level) of ­other-caste ­other-team participants as friends.
17 The results are similar if I instead define the outcome as the percentage of ­other-caste friends from among 
­very-low priority backups: those with a priority number of seven or above (online Appendix Figure A7). This set of 
173 backups has the advantage of being randomly selected, but the drawback of having played some matches (0.8 
on average), meaning there could have been some ­on-pitch contact.


--- PAGE 18 ---
1824
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
These effects are meaningful: full collaborative exposure increases ­non-teammate 
­cross-caste friendships by 0.15​σ​. The effect is stronger for adversarial contact: an 
increase in adversarial exposure from the least to the most reduces ­non-opponent 
­cross-caste friendships by 0.56​σ​.
In addition, the effect of collaborative contact on ­non-teammate friendships is 
much stronger for ­non-opponents than opponents (online Appendix Table A8). This 
fact suggests that the generalized effects do not come through ­other-caste teammates 
introducing players to ­other-caste opponents.
Network Access.—Another type of introduction might matter: players may get 
introduced to the ­other-caste friends of their ­other-caste teammates, causing positive 
effects of collaborative contact beyond direct interactions. Related, players may lose 
access to the ­other-caste friends of their ­other-caste opponents after facing them in 
a match. In each case, generalized effects of contact may come through network 
effects, rather than through players updating their beliefs about the outgroup. I use 
Figure 3.  Contact Affects ­Cross-Caste Friendships with ­Non-Teammates and ­Non-Opponents
Notes: The figure is created based on equation (1), and as described in Figure 2. The left panel outcome is the per-
centage of ­other-caste men from among the other teams (in the same league) who the participant considers friends 
or wants to spend time with (top) or considers friends (bottom). The right panel outcome is the percentage of 
­other-caste men from among ­non-playing backups who the participant considers friends or wants to spend time with 
(top) or considers friends (bottom). The left panel shows whether collaborative contact affects ­cross-caste friend-
ships other than with teammates. The right panel shows whether adversarial contact affects ­cross-caste friendships 
other than with opponents.
2
4
6
10
12
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
0
2
4
6
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
0
2
4
6
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
8
ˆ
ˆ
 β = 1.2
(0.76)
p = 0.11
 β = 0.77
(0.37)
p = 0.04
Proportion of teammates 
from other caste
Proportion of teammates 
from other caste
Collaborative
 γ = −9.6
(4.4)
p = 0.03
 γ = −3.1
(2.7)
p = 0.26
Proportion of opponents 
from other caste
Adversarial
Proportion of opponents 
from other caste
Percent other-caste 
non-playing-backup friends
Percent other-caste non-play-
ing-backup want to interact
Percent other-caste other-team
 friends
Percent other-caste other-team
 want to interact
ˆ
ˆ


--- PAGE 19 ---
1825
LOWE: TYPES OF CONTACT
VOL. 111 NO. 6
outcomes at the ­dyad-level to test directly for the network access mechanism, with 
the following specification for collaborative contact:
(3)      ​​y​ij​  =  ​(​α​jcl​ × ​Prop. Oth. Caste on Team​icl​)​ + ​β​1​ ​Teammate​ij​ 
	
+ ​β​2​ ​Friend of Oth. Caste Teammate​ij​ + ζ ​X​ij​ + ​ε​ij​​ ,
where ​​y​ij​​ is a dummy variable equal to 1 if participant ​i​ listed ​j​ as a friend, ​​α​jcl​​ 
are ­caste-by-league (of participant ​i​) fixed effects fully interacted with participant ​
j​ fixed effects, and these fixed effects are fully interacted with the categories 
of ​​Prop. Oth. Caste on Team​icl​​. In parallel with equation (1), the vector ​​X​ij​​ contains 
a dummy variable equal to 1 if ​i​ listed ​j​ as a friend at baseline, and a dummy vari-
able equal to 1 if ​i​ did not complete the social network survey prior to treatment 
assignment.
The two remaining regressors are dummy variables: ​Teammate​ij​ is equal to 1 if ​j​ is 
a teammate of ​i​’s (a direct link), and ​Friend of Oth. Caste Teammate​ij​ equals 1 if ​j​ is 
a friend (using baseline data) of any of ​i​’s ­other-caste teammates (an indirect link). 
The parameter ​​β​1​​ gives the causal effect on friendship of being directly linked (as a 
teammate) with a member of a different caste; ​​β​2​​ gives the causal effect on friend-
ship of being indirectly linked (through a teammate’s existing friendships) with a 
member of a different caste. Standard errors are ­dyadic-robust, allowing residuals to 
be correlated between any two dyads with a team in common.
For this specification, I restrict only to observations where ​i​ and ​j​ belong to different 
castes, and where ​i​ is in a mixed team (with ​​Prop. Oth. Caste on Team​icl​  >  0​). The 
intuition behind the specification is shown visually in online Appendix Figure A8. 
In brief, ​​β​1​​ is identified by comparing two players that share the same caste, league, 
and collaborative exposure, but belong to different teams. Suppose these players 
are ​i​ and ​i′​, and that player ​k​ is a teammate of ​i​’s, but not ​i′​ ’s. The effect is estimated 
by asking “how much more likely is it that ​i​ is friends with ​k​ after the league is 
over than ​i′​ is?” Similarly, suppose that there is some player ​j​ who is an ­other-caste 
friend (at baseline) of one of ​i​’s ­other-caste teammates, but not linked to any of ​i′​ ’s 
­other-caste teammates. Parameter ​​β​2​​ is estimated by asking “how much more likely 
is it that ​i​ is friends with ​j​ after the league is over than ​i′​ is?” Each of these effects is 
causal since the randomization to teams ensures random assignment of both direct 
and indirect links (conditional on fixed effects).
I use a parallel specification to test for network effects of adversarial contact:
(4)  ​​y​ij​  =  ​(​α​jcl​ × ​Prop. Oth. Caste of Opponents​icl​)​
	
+ ​θ​1​ ​Opponent​ij​ + ​θ​2​ ​Friend of Oth. Caste Opponents​ij​ + μ ​X​ij​ + ​u​ij​​ ,
where for this specification, I restrict to observations where ​i​ and ​j​ belong 
to different castes, and where ​i​ is assigned to league participation, since 
​​Prop. Oth. Caste of Opponents​icl​  >  0​ for all league participants.
Turning first to the collaborative network effect, assignment to be teammates with 
a player increases the probability of wanting to interact with that player in future 
by 24 percentage points (column 1, online Appendix Table A9) and friendship by 


--- PAGE 20 ---
1826
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
13 percentage points (column 2). In contrast, the effect of being indirectly linked 
to ­other-caste players through ­other-caste teammates is a precise zero for both out-
comes. Friendship effects beyond teammates do not come through network access: 
players are not getting introduced to the friends of their ­other-caste teammates. 
Instead, the effects are more consistent with players changing their general beliefs 
about the other caste groups.18 For opponents, both the direct and indirect network 
effects are insignificant and close to zero (columns 3 and 4). This suggests that 
the entire negative effect of adversarial contact on demand for social interaction is 
driven by generalization about those not interacted with.
Taken together, the results on social interaction suggest that the two types of con-
tact have opposite effects on inferences about the cooperativeness of other castes. In 
turn, these effects are likely driven by the experiences of collaboration and compe-
tition, and less so by the outcomes of the matches themselves.
Team Formation.—To capture willingness to interact on the cricket field, a deci-
sion which depends more on beliefs about ability, during ­Endline-1 surveyors told 
participants in each league that there would be two additional matches played two 
to three weeks later. One match would have stakes: there would be Rs. 500 (∼$8) 
awarded to the winning team. The other match would not have stakes: both teams 
would receive Rs. 250 (∼$4) regardless of their performance. Surveyors asked par-
ticipants to select their team twice: first for the match with stakes, and then imme-
diately after for the match without. They selected their team by scrolling through 
the entire list of participants,19 again seeing their full names and photos. I then 
randomly selected four players per league (∼1.25 percent probability) to have one 
of their two team choices implemented, making them the captain of their chosen 
team for one of the additional matches. I used the team choice data to calculate the 
number of ­other-caste teammates chosen by each participant. By having participants 
choose a team for matches both with and without stakes, I varied the strength of the 
main feature of team formation that is distinct from social interaction: that partici-
pants had an incentive to select those who will play the best cricket.
Analysis.—Both collaborative and adversarial contact have positive effects on 
­cross-caste team formation for the match with stakes, with a similar estimated 
effect: ​​β ˆ ​  =  0.71​ for collaborative contact ( ​p  <  0.01​), and ​​γ ˆ ​  =  0.88​ ( ​p  =  0.06​) 
for adversarial contact (Table 3, online Appendix Figure A10). These effects are 47 
to 59 percent of the mean of 1.5 ­other-caste men chosen, and are somewhat posi-
tively mediated by the ability of teammates and opponents (columns 3, 4).
To benchmark the collaborative effect, if players chose teammates ran-
domly, they would choose ­other-caste players 67 percent of the time. In contrast, 
­homogeneous-caste teams choose ­other-caste players 29 percent of the time, whereas 
those with four ­other-caste teammates choose ­other-caste players 47 percent of the 
18 There is some suggestive evidence that generalized effects come through friendships made with match spec-
tators: in particular, collaborative contact leads to more ­non-team ­cross-caste friendships in the leagues with more 
spectators (online Appendix Figure A9; Table A10), and participants that watch more matches make more friends 
(online Appendix Table A11). These findings are consistent with a different type of network access effect, or with 
­post-match spectator friendships being a consequence of belief updating about other castes.
19 In this case, the list was alphabetically ordered to help participants find their four favorite teammates quickly.


--- PAGE 21 ---
1827
LOWE: TYPES OF CONTACT
VOL. 111 NO. 6
time. Full collaborative exposure closes roughly half of the gap between the choices 
of ­homogeneous-caste team players and the random benchmark.
Unlike the effects on friendships, the adversarial contact effect on ­other-caste 
teammate choice is positive. Though adversarial contact creates animus, it still con-
veys knowledge about the ability of outgroup members. The net effect of the ani-
mus and knowledge is a greater willingness to work together with men from other 
castes. Given the social interaction outcomes, this suggests that the type of contact 
may have different implications for effects on future social integration versus future 
economic integration.
A natural interpretation of this set of results is that while the two types of con-
tact have opposite effects on inferences about cooperativeness, they both reduce 
­ability-based statistical discrimination, by revealing the ability of teammates and 
opponents. Given this interpretation, we might expect that removing the stakes for 
the bonus match should weaken the adversarial effect much more than the col-
laborative effect: without stakes, motives should shift away from picking the best 
cricketers, and toward picking those that are fun to play with (Bandiera, Barankay, 
and  Rasul 2009), reducing the adversarial contact effect more. This pattern is 
borne out in the data. Both types of contact have significantly weaker effects 
when stakes are removed. However, while collaborative contact continues to have 
Table 3—Both Types of Contact Reduce ­Ability-Based Statistical Discrimination
Number ­other-castes for team for match with...
Stakes
No stakes
Stakes
No stakes
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Prop. Oth. Caste on Team
0.71
0.45
0.71
0.47
(0.12)
(0.11)
(0.12)
(0.11)
Prop. Oth. Caste of Opponents
0.88
0.09
0.90
0.17
(0.46)
(0.44)
(0.46)
(0.44)
Prop. Oth. Caste on Team × Oth. Caste Team Ability
0.31
0.33
(0.18)
(0.18)
Prop. Oth. Caste of Opponents × Oth. Caste Opponent Ability
0.27
0.89
(0.70)
(0.66)
Observations
768
768
768
768
Outcome mean
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
Caste × league fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
p-value (collaborative  =  adversarial)
0.71
0.43
Collaborative: p-value (stakes  =  no stakes)
0.00048
Adversarial: p-value (stakes  =  no stakes)
0.0055
p-value (stakes has same effect on 
  collaborative and adversarial)
0.051
Notes: Standard errors clustered at ­team-level. Column 1 and 3 outcome is number of other castes (from zero to 
four) chosen as teammates for future match with stakes (monetary prize only for winning team). Column 2 and 4 
outcome is number of other castes chosen for a match without stakes (monetary prizes for both teams). Oth. Caste 
Team Ability is the average ability index across all other-caste players in a given player’s team (set equal to 0 in 
the case of no ­other-caste players), where the ability index is the average across three standardized baseline abil-
ity measures: maximum bowling speed, number of 4s/6s when batting, and number of catches when fielding. 
Oth. Caste Opponent Ability is the average ability index across all other-caste opponents. Each regression con-
trols for number of ­other-caste friends at baseline (and dummy for missing), and the five variables used for 
­re-randomization. Tests for equality of the coefficients in columns 1 and 2 come from a pooled regression with an 
interaction term between each contact variable and whether the choice was for the match with stakes or not. The 
bottom row gives the ­p-value from a test that the effect of removing stakes on the collaborative contact effect is 
equal to its effect on the adversarial contact effect.


--- PAGE 22 ---
1828
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
a positive significant effect, the adversarial contact effect falls significantly more 
( ​p  =  0.05​), to 0.09 (Table 3, bottom panel of online Appendix Figure A10,).20, 21
The results on willingness to interact show that the type of contact mediates some 
­belief-based channels, but not others. In particular, while the type of contact matters 
for future social integration, it matters much less for future economic integration, 
where incentives for interaction are motivated primarily by beliefs about ability.22
B.  Favoritism
Voting.—Beyond willingness to interact, caste differences may affect welfare 
and allocation through ingroup favoritism. I measured ­own-caste favoritism of the 
league participants with a voting exercise during ­Endline-2. Surveyors informed 
league participants that one member of each team would be selected to go on a field 
trip for professional cricket coaching. The field trip was popular: 96 percent said 
they would go if they were selected and were available. The selection was decided 
by vote. Each participant privately and anonymously ranked players on four other 
­randomly chosen teams (two opposition teams and two ­non-opposition teams), in 
random order, from 1 to 5. Surveyors explained to participants in basic terms that a 
Condorcet winner would be selected if one existed, and otherwise the winner would 
be decided by Borda count. The survey team encouraged participants to vote hon-
estly regardless of their understanding of the voting rule, and explicitly told them 
that cricket ability need not factor into their decision: they should just rank higher 
the players they most prefer. I designed this voting exercise to give a naturalistic 
measure (given the cricket intervention) of caste favoritism in the allocation of a 
desirable prize.
Analysis.—General castes show the most ­own-caste favoritism in voting, fol-
lowed by OBCs; even conditional on age and three ability measures (all of which 
are predictive), General castes and OBCs rank players from their own caste signifi-
cantly higher (columns 1 and 2, Table 4). General castes on average rank someone 
from their own caste 0.78 positions higher: this favoritism is larger than the effect of 
the votee being a full two standard deviations better in bowling, batting, and fielding 
ability. The ­own-caste favoritism of SC/STs is small and statistically insignificant 
(column  3), though this may signal that ­non-caste-related unobservables remain 
even after controlling for ability, motivating specifications that include fixed effects 
for the player voted on (columns 4 to 6).
20 Contact is less likely to affect ­non-teammate and ­non-opponent ­other-castes being chosen as teammates given 
the structure of the exercise. Participants can only select a maximum of four players, meaning that a participant who 
selects several players from their own team may have no slots left for ­other-caste players from other teams, even if 
they have become less biased. Despite this limitation, those with more ­other-caste players on their team also pick 
more ­other-caste players from other teams for a future team for the match with stakes (online Appendix Table A12), 
despite not having played with them. Given that the effect for the match without stakes is smaller and insignificant, 
this result suggests at least some generalized updating of ability beliefs (updating about those not played with).
21 The lack of a negative effect of adversarial contact for the match without monetary stakes may be because 
players get intrinsic value from winning matches, giving them an incentive to pick high ability players even in the 
absence of a monetary return.
22 This said, it is possible that some of the difference in effects is due to the fact that the social interaction mea-
sures are ­self-reported while the team formation measures are incentivized.


--- PAGE 23 ---
1829
LOWE: TYPES OF CONTACT
VOL. 111 NO. 6
Pooling all castes, and including votee fixed effects, the favoritism amounts to 
ranking ­own-castes 0.4 positions higher (column 4). Furthermore, this favoritism is 
not merely driven by players having more friends from their own caste, and show-
ing favoritism toward them: the coefficient is similar when controlling for pairwise 
friendship links at baseline (column 1, online Appendix Table A13).
Collaborative contact reduces ­own-caste favoritism by up to ­one-third of the 
mean (column 5, Table 4, ​p  =  0.08​). This effect is stronger when considering only 
votes for ­non-opponents, consistent with effects on the demand for social interaction 
(column 6).23 This result complements the results on social interaction and team 
formation. For both measures, collaborative contact leads to effects on other castes 
not interacted with, but in the voting exercise, the effect is more likely to imply a 
23 The reduction in favoritism is not driven only by a reduction in favoritism towards friends (columns 2 and 3, 
online Appendix Table A13): the treatment effects on “friendship favoritism” are insignificant and of inconsis-
tent sign. The magnitudes of the ­caste-favoritism effects remain relatively unchanged, though become marginally 
insignificant.
Table 4—Collaborative Contact Reduces ­Own-Caste Favoritism in Voting
Vote Rank  =  1 to 5, where 5 is best (­reverse-coded)
Gen.
OBC
SC/ST
All
All
Non-Opp
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Own caste voted on
0.78
0.32
0.06
0.40
(0.06)
(0.05)
(0.06)
(0.03)
Age of votee
0.06
0.07
0.07
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
Bowl ability of votee
0.10
0.14
0.13
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)
Bat ability of votee
0.12
0.14
0.09
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.03)
Field ability of votee
0.08
0.09
0.07
(0.03)
(0.02)
(0.03)
Own caste voted on × Prop. Oth. Caste on Team
−0.13
−0.20
(0.07)
(0.11)
Own caste voted on × Prop. Oth. Caste of Opponents
0.08
−0.40
(0.39)
(0.47)
Observations
3,035
3,200
2,945
9,180
9,180
4,570
Individuals
250
257
244
751
751
633
Votee fixed effects
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Prop. Oth. Caste on Team
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Prop. Oth. Caste of Opponents
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Caste × league × own caste voted on fixed effects
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
p-value (collaborative  =  adversarial)
0.6
0.68
Notes: The unit of observation is a ­voter-votee pair. ­Voter-clustered standard errors for columns 1 to 4. Team of 
­voter-clustered standard errors for columns 5 and 6. All columns exclude votes for teams with players only of the 
same caste of the voter or players only of other castes. Votee fixed effects can be included because the same per-
son can be voted on by multiple voters. Columns 1 to 3 only include the votes made by General, OBC, and SC/ST 
caste players respectively. Column 6 only includes votes made on teams that were not faced as opponents during 
the league. Each ability measure of the person voted on is from baseline ability testing. Bowl ability is maximum 
bowling speed (standardized), Bat ability is number of 4s/6s out of 6 (standardized), and Field ability is number 
of catches out of 6 (standardized). Columns 5 and 6 also control for number of ­other-caste friends at baseline (and 
dummy for missing), and the five variables used for ­re-randomization, as well as each interacted with Own caste 
voted on.


--- PAGE 24 ---
1830
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
JUNE 2021
shift in social preferences. In contrast, the adversarial contact effect is not statisti-
cally significant (columns 5, 6),24 but given imprecision, equality between the col-
laborative and adversarial effects cannot be rejected ( ​p  =  0.6, 0.68​).
Ability Beliefs.—The effect of collaborative contact on caste favoritism in vot-
ing could be explained by shifting social preferences or generalized ability belief 
updating. The latter might predominate if contact corrects or tightens belief dis-
tributions about the cricket ability of ­other-caste players not played with. There 
is already some suggestive evidence of generalized belief updating: collaborative 
contact increases ­other-caste choices among players not played with for the future 
match with stakes, but not for the one without (online Appendix Table A12). The 
question then is whether such generalized belief updating can account for the effect 
on voting.
To explore this, note that a full standard deviation increase in one of the baseline 
ability measures improves the vote by 0.07 to 0.14 ranks (columns ­1–3, Table 4). 
Given these estimates, for the collaborative effect on ­non-opponents (column 6) to 
be fully explained by effects on statistical discrimination we would need full collab-
orative exposure to lead players to treat ­other-caste players that they have not seen 
play as if they are 0.45 to 0.9​σ​ higher on each of the ability measures. This extent of 
generalized belief updating seems relatively unlikely given that even those with no 
collaborative exposure see signals of the ability of the ­other-caste players they play 
against. This exercise suggests that collaborative contact reduces ­own-caste favor-
itism in voting at least partially through its impact on preferences, though I cannot 
rule out the possibility that the effect is driven by generalized belief updating.
C.  Efficiency
Trading.—I designed a new trading exercise to measure efficiency impacts 
through contact changing barriers to ­cross-caste interaction.25 For this exercise, 
surveyors visited all participants at their homes for ­Endline-1, and gave them each 
two goods: a pair of gloves and a pair of ­flip-flops, each worth roughly Rs. 100 
(∼$1.50). The pairs were intentionally ­mismatched: the participant either received 
two ­left-hand or two ­right-hand gloves, and two ­left-foot or two ­right-foot ­flip-flops. 
The ­mismatching created gains from trade. Surveyors told participants that all 
league ­sign-ups would be receiving the same two ­mismatched goods, and that they 
would have the next four or five days of regular life to find people to trade with (in 
practice, surveyors revisited for ­Endline-2 a median of 10 days later). To provide 
further gains from trade, surveyors gave participants monetary incentives. One-half 
of the participants earned Rs. 10 (∼$0.16) for each successful trade, while the rest 
earned Rs. 20 (∼$0.32).
24 More concretely, the ­ex post minimum detectable effect size with 80 percent power and a 5 percent signif-
icance level is 1.09: larger than the overall bias of the most biased caste group. In this sense, the test is clearly 
­underpowered.
25 I am grateful for conversations with Frank Schilbach that inspired aspects of this design. The design here 
complements a larger literature that uses trading games to understand the efficiency of markets, with Bulte et al. 
(2017) being a recent example in a developing country setting. For the full survey script, see online Appendix 
Section H.


--- PAGE 25 ---
1831
LOWE: TYPES OF CONTACT
VOL. 111 NO. 6
In addition, the survey team stuck colored stickers on each ­mismatched pair, and 
we offered incentives for trades made with identical goods that had a different color 
sticker. This served to create, and obfuscate, ­cross-caste gains from trade, since 
the three possible sticker colors were assigned to very strongly, though not per-
fectly, correlate with caste. We informed participants that different colors would 
be more difficult to find, but not that colors correlated with caste.26 I randomly 
selected one-half of the participants to receive this ­color-switching bonus, with half 
of these promised Rs. 50 (∼$0.80) and half promised Rs. 100 (∼$1.60) per good. 
The ­color-switching bonus incentivized ­cross-caste trade without requiring explicit 
references to caste. This incentive serves two purposes: (i) it can be used to “price” 
the effects of treatments, and (ii) by creating gains from specifically ­cross-caste 
trade, providing this incentive permits a test of the efficiency effects of contact. 
Surveyors logged successful trades during ­Endline-2. If any of the IDs on the final 
gloves/­flip-flops were initially assigned to a participant of a different caste, I classi-
fied this participant as having made a ­cross-caste glove/­flip-flop trade.
According to participant ­self-reports, almost all trades (95 percent) were made 
directly without the use of a middleman, and only a handful involved the transfer of 
any money (0.3 percent), suggesting that participants tended not to enter into any 
­surplus-sharing agreements.
Analysis.—Most participants trade successfully: 88 percent of goods received by 
those in ­homogeneous-caste teams are traded, with no statistically significant effect 
of collaborative or adversarial contact (column 1 of Table 5; top panel of online 
Appendix Figure A11). It follows that any efficiency effects must come through the 
intensive margin.
The ­color-switch incentives have large effects, increasing ­cross-caste trade by 22 
to 25 percentage points relative to a mean in ­homogeneous-caste teams of 52 per-
cent (column 2). Collaborative contact has a small and positive, though marginally 
insignificant, effect: full collaborative exposure increases ­cross-caste trade by 6 per-
centage points ( ​p  =  0.15​).27 While adversarial contact has a large negative coeffi-
cient (​− 0.15​), this estimate is not significant given the large standard errors, and the 
equality of effects of collaborative and adversarial contact cannot quite be rejected 
at conventional levels ( ​p  =  0.22​).
These results for the full sample include those without efficiency gains from 
­cross-caste trade: those without the ­color-switch incentives. For the half of the 
sample with potential efficiency gains, full collaborative exposure significantly 
increases ­cross-caste trade by 11 percentage points (column 3 and bottom panel 
of online Appendix Figure A11) and trade payouts by Rs. 15 or 18 percent of the 
­homogeneous-caste team mean (column  4). This effect on ­cross-caste trade is 
roughly ­one-half of the effect of the ­color-switch incentives. Given a local daily 
wage of Rs. 200, and assuming a linear effect of incentives, full collaborative contact 
increases ­cross-caste trade as much as a direct incentive equal to one or two hours of 
26 Participants may have been able to infer the ­caste-color correlation, though debriefs with surveyors suggest 
that this rarely happened.
27 Nevertheless, ­cross-caste trade is lower for those in ­homogeneous-caste teams than those with any level of 
collaborative contact (­middle-left panel, online Appendix Figure A11). As a result, if I estimate equation (1) with an 
indicator for ­mixed-caste team instead of ​​Prop. Oth. Caste on Team​icl​​, ​​β ˆ ​  =  6.4​ with a ­p-value of 0.03.
