

--- PAGE 1 ---
American Economic Review 2021, 111(3): 831–870 
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20191777
831
Social Media, News Consumption, and Polarization: 
Evidence from a Field Experiment†
By Ro’ee Levy*
Does the consumption of ideologically congruent news on social 
media exacerbate polarization? I estimate the effects of social media 
news exposure by conducting a large field experiment randomly 
offering participants subscriptions to conservative or liberal news 
outlets on Facebook. I collect data on the causal chain of media 
effects: subscriptions to outlets, exposure to news on Facebook, vis-
its to online news sites, and sharing of posts, as well as changes in 
political opinions and attitudes. Four main findings emerge. First, 
random variation in exposure to news on social media substan-
tially affects the slant of news sites that individuals visit. Second, 
exposure to ­counter-attitudinal news decreases negative attitudes 
toward the opposing political party. Third, in contrast to the effect 
on attitudes, I find no evidence that the political leanings of news 
outlets affect political opinions. Fourth, Facebook’s algorithm is 
less likely to supply individuals with posts from ­counter-attitudinal 
outlets, conditional on individuals subscribing to them. Together, 
the results suggest that social media algorithms may limit expo-
sure to ­counter-attitudinal news and thus increase polarization. 
(JEL C93, D72, L82)
In 2019, more than 70 percent of American adults consumed news on social 
media, compared to fewer than one in eight Americans in 2008.1 Based on Pew sur-
veys, Facebook is the dominant social media platform for news consumption, and 
1 The 2008 figure is based on the Pew Research Center 2008 Biennial Media Consumption Survey. The 2019 
figure is based on the Pew Research Center American Trends Panel Wave 51, July 2019.
* Massachusetts Institute of Technology (email: roeelevy@mit.edu). Stefano DellaVigna was the coeditor
for this article. I am deeply grateful to Ebonya Washington, Joseph S. Shapiro, and Dean Karlan for their guid-
ance and support throughout this project. I thank three anonymous referees for their insightful comments. I also 
thank Hunt Allcot, Eran Amsalem, Ian Ball, Dirk Bergemann, Leonardo Bursztyn, Alex Coppock, Oren Danieli, 
Eduardo Fraga, Matthew Gentzkow, Matthew Graham, Eoin F. McGuirk, Alexey Makarin, Gregory J. Martin, 
Martin Mattsson, Brendan J. Nyhan, Rohini Pande, David Rand, Dominik Rehse, Oren Sarig, David Schönholzer, 
Katherine Wagner, Jaya Y. Wen, and Mor Zoran, along with seminar participants at Bar Ilan, Berkeley, Booth, 
Cornell, IDC, Haifa, Hebrew University, Microsoft Research, NBER Digitization, Northwestern, NYU, Tel Aviv, 
UCLA Anderson, UCSD, Yale, and the ZEW conference on the economics of IT, for their valuable comments. 
Financial support from the ISPS Field Experiment’s Initiative, the Tobin Center for Economic Policy, the Yale 
Department of Economics, the Yale Program in Applied Economics and Policy, the Yale School of Management, 
and David Rand is greatly appreciated. All errors are my own. The experiment was determined to be exempt from 
human subjects review by the Yale Institutional Review Board. The experiment is registered at the AEA RCT registry  
(ID 0002713).
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20191777 to visit the article page for additional materials and author  
disclosure statement.


--- PAGE 2 ---
832
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2021
“among millennials, Facebook is far and away the most common source for news 
about government and politics” (Mitchell, Gottfried, and Matsa 2015, p. 8). As 
social media becomes a major news source, there are growing concerns that indi-
viduals are exposed to more ­pro-attitudinal news, defined as news matching their 
ideology, and as a result, polarization increases (Sunstein 2017).
In this paper, I test whether these concerns are warranted. I analyze the effects of 
exposure to pro- and ­counter-attitudinal news outlets by conducting a large online 
field experiment randomizing exposure to news on Facebook, and by collecting sur-
vey, browsing, and social media data.
To motivate the experiment, I first provide descriptive statistics on online news 
consumption. I show that news sites visited through social media, and specifically 
Facebook, are associated with more segregated, ­pro-attitudinal, and extreme news, 
compared to other news sites visited.
I recruited American Facebook users to the experiment using Facebook ads. After 
completing a baseline survey, participants were randomly assigned to a liberal treat-
ment, a conservative treatment, or a control group. Participants in the liberal and 
conservative treatments were asked to subscribe to up to four liberal or conservative 
outlets on Facebook, respectively (e.g., MSNBC or Fox News), by clicking a “Like 
Page” button embedded at the end of the survey.2 Remarkably, in each treatment, 
approximately one-half of the participants complied by subscribing to at least one 
outlet. When individuals subscribe to an outlet on Facebook, posts shared by the 
outlet may subsequently appear in their Facebook feed. A post usually contains 
the story’s headline and often includes a link to the full news story on the outlet’s 
website.
I designed the experiment to have high external validity. A nudge offering sub-
scriptions to outlets is very common on social media and participants could have 
subscribed to any of these outlets, at no cost, without the intervention. Besides the 
offer, the experiment did not directly intervene in any behavior. The news supplied 
to participants was the actual news provided by leading media outlets during the 
study period. Facebook’s algorithm determined which of the posts shared by the 
outlets appeared in the participants’ Facebook feeds. Finally, participants decided 
whether to skip, read, click, or share posts. As a result, the effect of the intervention 
is almost identical to the experience of millions of Americans who subscribe to pop-
ular news outlets on Facebook.
I estimate the effect of the intervention on exposure to news in the Facebook 
feed, news sites visited, news shared, political opinions, and affective polarization, 
defined as negative attitudes toward the opposing political party. Affective polar-
ization is a primary outcome of interest since this measure of polarization has been 
increasing (Iyengar and Krupenkin 2018), and there are concerns over its impli-
cations for governance, accountability of elected officials, and even labor markets 
(Iyengar et al. 2019).
To measure subscriptions to outlets on Facebook and posts shared, I asked par-
ticipants to log in to the survey using their Facebook account. To measure exposure 
to news in the Facebook feed and visits to news sites, I developed a Google Chrome 
2 To simplify terminology, throughout the paper I will describe the action of “liking” a page of a news organiza-
tion as subscribing to an outlet on Facebook.


--- PAGE 3 ---
833
LEVY: SOCIAL MEDIA, NEWS CONSUMPTION, AND POLARIZATION
VOL. 111 NO. 3
extension and asked a subset of participants who took the survey on a computer 
using Chrome to install it. To estimate the effect on opinions and attitudes, I invited 
participants to an endline survey approximately two months after the intervention. 
My sample is composed of 37,494 participants who completed the baseline survey. 
34,592 of those participants provided access to the posts they shared for at least two 
weeks, 1,835 installed the extension for at least two weeks, and 17,635 took the 
endline survey.
This paper has four main findings. First, exposure to news on social media sub-
stantially affects online news consumption. Following increased exposure to posts 
from the randomly offered outlets, participants visited the websites of the outlets, 
even when the outlets did not match their ideology. Visiting the websites had a sub-
stantial effect on the mean slant of participants’ overall online news consumption. 
The difference between the ­intention-to-treat (ITT) effects of the liberal and conser-
vative treatments on the slant of news sites visited in the two weeks following the 
intervention is 14 percent of the difference in the slant of sites visited by liberals and 
conservatives in the control group.
Various economic theories explain why individuals optimally prefer news that 
matches their ideology (Gentzkow, Shapiro, and Stone 2015). However, I find that 
news consumption strongly responds to an exogenous shock to the feed, meaning 
that individuals often consume news incidentally, and do not fully ­re-optimize their 
browsing behavior to keep the slant of the news sites they visit constant. The results 
imply that social media algorithms can substantially alter news consumption habits 
and that while social media is associated with ­pro-attitudinal news, individuals are 
willing to engage with ­counter-attitudinal news when it is made more accessible on 
social media.
My second finding is that exposure to ­counter-attitudinal news decreases affec-
tive polarization, compared to ­pro-attitudinal news. I construct an affective polar-
ization index measuring attitudes toward political parties. The index includes 
questions such as how participants feel toward their own party and the oppos-
ing party, i.e., a “feeling thermometer.” When estimating the effects on polar-
ization, I redefine the treatments as pro- and ­counter-attitudinal. For example, 
a ­counter-attitudinal treatment is a liberal treatment assigned to a conservative 
participant or a conservative treatment assigned to a liberal participant. The ITT 
and ­treatment-on-treated (TOT) effects of the ­counter-attitudinal treatment on the 
affective polarization index, compared to the ­pro-attitudinal treatment, are −0.03 
and −0.06 standard deviations, respectively. The TOT effect should be interpreted 
as the effect on individuals who subscribe to new outlets when nudged to sub-
scribe. Comparing each treatment to the control group suggests that the effect on 
polarization is driven by the ­counter-attitudinal treatment but this result should 
be interpreted cautiously since participants in the control group were more likely 
to complete the endline survey (there is no differential attrition between the two 
treatment arms).
I compare the results to existing benchmarks by focusing on the feeling ther-
mometer questions. The experiment’s ITT and TOT effects decreased the differ-
ence between participants’ feelings toward their own party and the opposing 
party by 0.58 and 0.96 degrees on a ­0–100 scale over two months, respectively. 
For ­comparison, based on the American National Election Survey (ANES), this 


--- PAGE 4 ---
834
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2021
measure of affective polarization increased by 3.­83–10.52 degrees between 1996  
and 2016.3
Third, in contrast to the effect on attitudes, I do not find evidence that the slant 
of news outlets affects political opinions. The effect of the liberal and conserva-
tive treatments on a political opinions index focusing on issues and political figures 
covered during the study period is small in magnitude, precisely estimated, and not 
statistically significant.
The paper’s fourth finding is that Facebook’s algorithm may limit exposure to 
­counter-attitudinal news. I show that participants in the ­counter-attitudinal treatment 
were exposed to substantially fewer posts from the outlets they subscribed to in the 
intervention, compared to participants in the ­pro-attitudinal treatment.
Combined, the results paint a complicated picture. On the one hand, Facebook’s 
algorithm seems to filter ­counter-attitudinal news, probably since it attempts to per-
sonalize news based on the user’s behavior and perceived interests. While it is not 
possible to estimate the effect of specific posts filtered by the algorithm, I show that 
exposure to ­counter-attitudinal news decreases affective polarization. This suggests 
that social media algorithms may be increasing polarization. On the other hand, this 
paper also shows that individuals are willing to engage with ­counter-attitudinal news, 
and social media platforms provide a setting where a subtle nudge can substantially 
diversify news consumption and consequently decrease affective polarization.
This paper contributes to the literature on social media and news consumption. 
In his seminal book The Filter Bubble, Eli Pariser warned that the “era of person-
alization is here” (Pariser 2011, p. 19). However, recent reviews concluded that 
“we lack convincing evidence of algorithmic filter bubbles in politics” (Guess et al. 
2018, p. 12). Papers in this literature typically estimate segregation in online news 
based on ­cross-sectional analysis of browsing behavior (Gentzkow and Shapiro 
2011; Flaxman, Goel, and Rao 2016; Peterson, Sharad, and Iyengar 2019; Guess 
forthcoming). Since they lack social media data, these papers cannot measure segre-
gation within one’s social media feed. One exception is a paper analyzing Facebook 
data, arguing that exposure to ­counter-attitudinal news shared by friends is mostly 
limited by individual choices and not by algorithmic ranking (Bakshy, Messing, 
and Adamic 2015). The paper analyzes large data but does not exploit exogenous 
variation. I advance the literature by generating experimental variation in subscrip-
tions to outlets and collecting data on exposure to posts from those outlets. This 
allows me to decompose the mechanisms limiting exposure to ­counter-attitudinal 
news and demonstrate the existence of a filter bubble, i.e., that Facebook’s algorithm 
is more likely to expose individuals to news matching their ideology, conditional on 
subscription.
My findings contribute to the literature on social media and polarization by gen-
erating variation in the main mechanism through which social media is suspected 
to increase polarization: the distance between individuals’ ideology and the slant 
of their news consumption. Related papers show that the internet and Facebook 
3 The increase in polarization depends on the weights and the respondents included in the sample. When using 
the ANES ­face-to-face sample for consistency (Boxell, Gentzkow, and Shapiro 2018), the increase is 3.83 degrees. 
When including also the 2016 web sample (Iyengar et al. 2019), the increase is 10.52 degrees. The ANES ­top-codes 
the thermometer at 97 degrees. The results are almost exactly the same when I ­top-code the results.


--- PAGE 5 ---
835
LEVY: SOCIAL MEDIA, NEWS CONSUMPTION, AND POLARIZATION
VOL. 111 NO. 3
may increase polarization (Lelkes, Sood, and Iyengar 2015; Allcott et al. 2020),
but based on demographics, they may not be the primary driver in the rise of 
polarization (Boxell, Gentzkow, and Shapiro 2018).4 These papers focus on the
­reduced-form effect of social media and do not identify the causal effect of pro- or 
­counter-attitudinal news. Indeed, a recent review argues that “it is far from clear … 
that partisan news actually causes affective polarization” (Iyengar et al. 2019, p.
135). To the best of my knowledge, this paper provides the first experimental evi-
dence that ­counter-attitudinal news decreases affective polarization and thus demon-
strates that nudges diversifying social media news exposure can be effective.
This study also contributes to a ­well-established literature on media persuasion 
by randomly assigning subscriptions to news outlets. Survey experiments (e.g.,
Coppock, Ekins, and Kirby 2018) and papers with ­quasi-experimental designs (e.g.,
DellaVigna and Kaplan 2007) find that individuals are persuaded by the news they
consume.5 While in many contexts field experiments are considered the gold stan-
dard for estimating causal effects, field experiments estimating the effects of media 
outlets are not common. One notable exception is a study randomizing subscriptions 
to the Washington Post and Washington Times, which does not find an effect on 
opinions but is limited by a relatively small sample size (Gerber, Karlan, and Bergan
2009). This paper studies a different setting, social media, and shows how the unique
features of this setting affect news exposure. Focusing on social media also allows 
me to analyze engagement with news and quantify the effect of news exposure.
Methodologically, this paper contributes to a growing literature conducting 
online ­media-related experiments (Bail et al. 2018, Chen and Yang 2019, Allcott et
al. 2020, Jo 2020, Mosquera et al. 2020) by demonstrating how an experiment can
exploit social media’s existing infrastructure to gradually distribute news to par-
ticipants in a natural setting. In contrast to most online experiments, participants 
were not asked to consume any content or continue complying with the treatment 
over time, not did they receive frequent reminders of the experiment. The natural, 
unobtrusive intervention means that it is unlikely that experimenter effects drive the 
study’s result. To precisely detect the small effects that are expected as a result of a 
subtle intervention, I collect a sample size that is an order of magnitude larger than 
most other related experiments.
I.  Background: Facebook
This study focuses on Facebook since it is the dominant social media platform, 
used by seven out of ten American adults. Most of these users visit Facebook several 
times a day,6 and the platform accounts for 45 percent of all time spent on social 
media (Williamson 2018). Despite its prominence, Facebook has been understud-
ied, especially compared to Twitter (Guess et al. 2018).
4 Other studies estimating the effect of social media on political behavior include Bursztyn et al. (2020); Müller 
and Schwarz (2020); and Enikolopov, Makarin, and Petrova (2020). See Zhuravskaya, Petrova, and Enikolopov
(2020) for a recent review.
5 Other studies estimating media effects on political outcomes include Chiang and Knight (2011); Gentzkow,
Shapiro, and Sinkinson (2011); Durante, Pinotti, and Tesei (2019); and Okuyama (2020). See Strömberg (2015)
for a review.
6 Facebook usage is based on the Pew Research Center January 2019 Core Trends Survey.


--- PAGE 6 ---
836
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2021
The most important Facebook feature is the news feed, where users scroll through 
a list of posts curated by Facebook’s algorithm. Posts in the feed are typically shared 
by the user’s Facebook friends, shared by Facebook pages the user subscribes to 
(likes), or are sponsored (advertisements shared by pages to promote content). The
posts may include text, video, pictures, and links.
Facebook is a very popular source for news consumption. In 2019, 52 percent of 
Americans reported getting at least some of their news on Facebook, more than the 
share of Americans getting news on all other social media platforms combined.7 
While this study focuses on the United States, understanding Facebook’s influence 
has global implications. A Reuters Institute survey found that in 37 out of 38 mid-
dle- and ­high-income countries surveyed, more than 20 percent of the population 
consumed news through Facebook weekly (Reuters Institute 2019). A paper ana-
lyzing the survey’s data concluded that Facebook “reaches the widest international 
audience of any media organization in our sample” (Kennedy and Prat 2019, p. 10).
With Facebook’s growing influence, it has faced several controversies in recent 
years, including an effort by the ­Russian-based Internet Research Agency to influ-
ence the elections, the spread of fake news during the 2016 US election cycle, and 
Cambridge Analytica’s attempt to assist campaigns with personally targeted ads. 
The concerns over each of these scandals were based on the assumption that indi-
viduals are easily persuaded by political content on social media.
II.  Design and Data
This section summarizes the experimental design, data, and empirical strategy. 
The design of the experiment is also presented in Figure 1.
A. Experimental Design
I recruited American adults to the experiment in ­February to March 2018 using 
Facebook ads. 978,628 people saw the ads, 87,648 people clicked the links in the 
ads, and approximately one-half of those began the survey. For more details on 
the ads, see online Appendix Section A.1.1. Individuals who clicked the ads were 
directed to the survey landing page, where they reviewed the consent form and 
began the survey by logging in using their Facebook account.
After logging in, and before treatment assignment, four potential liberal outlets 
and four potential conservative outlets were defined for each participant. The same 
eight potential outlets were defined for each participant unless a participant already 
subscribed to one of the outlets in baseline, in which case it was replaced with an 
alternative outlet, to ensure only new outlets would be offered. Toward the end of 
the survey, participants were randomly assigned to a liberal treatment, a conserva-
tive treatment, or a control group, with the randomization blocked by participants’ 
­self-reported baseline ideology.8 Participants in the conservative treatment were 
7 Calculation based on the Pew Research Center American Trends Panel Wave 51.
8 Respondents were asked where they position themselves on a ­7-point ideological scale, with an additional 
option of “I haven’t thought about it much.” Each block is composed of three sequential participants who chose the 
same answer. The first participant in a block was randomly assigned to one of the three treatment groups, the second 


--- PAGE 7 ---
837
LEVY: SOCIAL MEDIA, NEWS CONSUMPTION, AND POLARIZATION
VOL. 111 NO. 3
offered to subscribe (like) to their four potential conservative outlets and partici-
pants in the liberal treatment were offered to subscribe to their four potential liberal 
outlets. Participants in the control group were not offered any outlets.
I nudged participants to subscribe to the outlets by explaining that subscribing 
could expose them to new perspectives. Participants were not required to subscribe to 
any outlet and did not receive monetary compensation for subscribing. The interven-
tion did not provide exclusive access to these outlets, and any individual can subscribe 
to these outlets on Facebook, regardless of the intervention. Since participants were 
logged into their Facebook account when taking the survey, the offer to subscribe was 
integrated within the survey, and the only action required by participants was to click 
the standard Like Page button. Facebook users often encounter this button, for exam-
ple when Facebook suggests pages they may be interested in or when outlets promote 
their page. Online Appendix Figure A.1 provides an example of the intervention.
After participants subscribed to an outlet by “liking” its Facebook page, posts from 
the outlet appeared in their feeds, among many other posts, according to Facebook’s 
algorithm. Participants decided whether to read a post, click a link, share a post, or 
unsubscribe from an outlet, just like the decisions they make regarding other posts 
appearing in their feed. Due to the simple common intervention, the organic nature 
of any subsequent effect, and the fact that participants were not reminded of the 
participant was randomly assigned to one of the two remaining groups, and the third participant was assigned to 
the remaining group.
Figure 1. Experimental Design
Recruitment using Facebook ads
(978,628 individuals exposed to the ads)
Baseline survey, February–March 2018 (N = 37,494)
Determine four potential liberal and four potential conservative outlets
Block randomization by ideology
Liberal treatment:
Offer liberal outlets
Compliers:
Subscriptions ≥ 1
(53%)
Control
Conservative treatment:
Offer conservative outlets
Main outcomes
Pages liked;
Posts shared
Facebook data
(N = 34,592:
Liberal = 11,560
Control = 11,571
Conservative = 11,461)
(N = 1,835:
Liberal = 585
Control = 612
Conservative = 638)
Exposure to posts in
the Facebook feed;
News sites visited
Extension data
(N = 17,635
Liberal = 5,764
Control = 6,115
Conservative = 5,756)
Political opinions;
Affective polarization
Endline survey data
Non-compliers:
Subscriptions = 0
(47%)
Compliers:
Subscriptions ≥ 1
(53%)
Non-compliers:
Subscriptions = 0
(47%)


--- PAGE 8 ---
838
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2021
intervention, experimenter effects are unlikely to play a large role in explaining the 
effects, at least compared to similar studies.9 Because individuals can subscribe to 
outlets on Facebook at no cost and no monetary incentives were provided, the inter-
vention is scalable.
B. The Setting: Media Outlets and the News Environment
The primary liberal outlets offered in the experiment were HuffPost, MSNBC, The 
New York Times, and Slate. The primary conservative offered outlets were Fox News, 
The National Review, The Wall Street Journal, and The Washington Times. The news 
outlets were chosen to ensure participants are offered a diverse set of popular outlets 
(Fox News and the New York Times are two of the three most popular news pages on 
Facebook) with a clear ideological slant. Online Appendix Table A.1 displays the
full list of the primary and alternative outlets offered.
Figure 2 shows that the men and women mentioned most often in posts shared by 
the eight primary outlets and the two main alternative outlets are political figures. 
Unsurprisingly, President Trump is the dominant figure mentioned. Political stories 
that made headlines during the study period can be observed in the figure: Trump’s 
alleged affair with Stormy Daniels, Robert Mueller’s investigation, and the nego-
tiation with North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un. The figure also demonstrates that 
liberal outlets focused on scandals related to the presidency and mentioned Michael 
Cohen, Stormy Daniels, Scott Pruitt, and Vladimir Putin more often than conserva-
tive outlets.
C. Data Collection and Subsamples
Experiment Data.—The analysis of the experiment relies on three datasets: 
­self-reported survey data, Facebook data, and browser data. This is among the 
first studies combining experimental variation with social media and ­news-related 
browsing data. Table 1 presents the main datasets and subsamples analyzed.
Survey Data: The endline survey measures ­self-reported political opinions, affec-
tive polarization, and changes in ­self-reported news consumption habits. A total 
of 17,635 participants took the endline survey and constitute the endline survey 
subsample.
Facebook Data on Pages Liked and Posts Shared: Participants logged in to the 
survey using their Facebook account, through a Facebook app created for the proj-
ect. They were asked to provide separate permissions to access the pages they sub-
scribe to and posts they share. Providing permissions was voluntary, they could be 
revoked at any time, and were revoked automatically approximately two months 
after participants logged in to a survey. I observe all posts shared or pages liked until 
permissions are revoked. Since baseline subscriptions were required to define the 
9 Participants were asked at the end of the survey what they think is the purpose of the study. Online Appendix 
Section C.1 shows that participants understood the study was about media and politics and that there do not appear 
to be dramatic differences between the answers of participants in the pro- and ­counter-attitudinal treatments.


--- PAGE 9 ---
839
LEVY: SOCIAL MEDIA, NEWS CONSUMPTION, AND POLARIZATION
VOL. 111 NO. 3
potential outlets, participants who did not provide initial permissions to access their 
subscriptions are excluded from the baseline sample.10
Data on posts shared are used to estimate the effect of the intervention on political 
behavior. I exclude posts sharing photos, albums, music, and events. The remaining 
posts typically include text with a link or an embedded video. Since posts shared are 
observable to the participant’s social network or the general public, sharing posts 
can have a direct cost to the reputation of the participant. Approximately 92 percent 
of baseline participants provided access to the posts they shared for at least two full 
weeks following the intervention constituting the access posts subsample.
10 While providing permissions was not required to complete the survey or to be eligible for any rewards, 
the vast majority of participants who completed the survey provided these permissions. Participants who revoked 
­permissions after the intervention are included in the baseline sample.
Figure 2. Figures Mentioned in Posts Shared by Outlets during the Study Period
Notes: This figure shows the men and women mentioned most often in posts shared by the eight primary outlets 
and two main alternative outlets between February 28 and April 25, 2018, the median dates the baseline survey and 
endline survey were taken. Approximately 32 percent of posts with text mentioned a name. The ­x-axis is the share 
of times an individual was mentioned in a post by one of the liberal outlets (top bars) and by one of the conserva-
tive outlets (bottom bars), of all mentions of individuals. To fit all the figures on the same scale, the ­x-axis is bro-
ken for Donald Trump, who is by far the most dominant person mentioned. The figures were identified using the 
Spacy Natural Language Processing algorithm and ­post-processing names (e.g., removing possessives). Names that 
appear in only one outlet are excluded. If only a last name is mentioned, it is associated with the dominant first and 
last name combination when such a combination exists. To simplify the graph, the names “Trump” and “Donald 
Trump” are determined to be the same individual, even though “Trump” could refer to other members of President 
Trump’s family.
0
0
0.02
0.04
Donald Trump
0.1
0.2
0.3
Share of individuals mentioned
Liberal
Hillary Clinton
Barack Obama
Sarah Sanders
Andrew McCabe
Kim Jong-un
James Comey
Mark Zuckerberg
Vladimir Putin
Jared Kushner
Scott Pruitt
Robert Mueller
Michael Cohen
Stormy Daniels
Conservative


--- PAGE 10 ---
840
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2021
Extension Data on Browser Behavior and the Facebook Feed: Participants who 
completed the baseline survey using Google Chrome on a computer were asked to 
install a browser extension collecting data on the Facebook feed and ­news-related 
browsing behavior, in exchange for a small reward. The offer was made toward the 
end of the survey, but before the intervention, to ensure ­take-up is not affected by 
the intervention. A total of 2,262 of the 8,084 participants who were offered the 
extension installed it. I focus on 1,835 participants who kept the extension installed 
for at least two weeks and constitute the extension subsample.
The Facebook feed data are used to analyze news exposure by estimating how 
often participants were exposed to posts from outlets on Facebook. I observe the 
posts that participants saw when they used their computer mouse to scroll their 
feed. I do not observe whether a post is a sponsored advertisement, but identify sus-
pected ads as posts in the feed from pages participants did not subscribe to and posts 
appearing in the feed repeatedly. I attribute a post to a news outlet if it was created 
by the outlet’s Facebook page or contains a link to the outlet’s domain.11 While the 
variation generated by the experiment is in subscriptions to the outlets’ Facebook 
pages, my analysis includes news articles shared by the participants’ friends, to 
accurately capture total exposure to news outlets on Facebook.
The browsing behavior data is used to estimate the effect on the news sites par-
ticipants visited. The extension can greatly reduce measurement error, compared to 
­self-reported estimates of news consumption, as individuals’ ­self-reported media 
habits may be more polarized than their actual news consumption (Guess, Nyhan, 
and Reifler 2017).
11 To match URLs with news outlets, I first convert over ten million URLs to their final endpoint, following 
redirects. This is required since many links on Facebook are based on ­URL-shortening services such as tinyurl.com.
Table 1—Samples, Data Sources, and Outcomes
Sample
Data sources
Number of participants  
and retention
Main outcomes
Baseline sample
Baseline survey; Facebook 
data on participants’  
subscriptions to outlets
37,494 (all participants)
Subscriptions to outlets 
in the intervention 
(compliance)
Access posts  
  subsample
Facebook data for  
participants who provided 
permissions to access their 
posts and subscriptions for at 
least two weeks
34,592 (94 percent of 
participants who provided 
permissions in baseline)
Subscription to outlets 
over time; posts shared 
by participants
Extension  
  subsample
Browser data for participants 
who installed the extension 
for at least two weeks
1,835 (81 percent of  
participants who installed 
the extension in baseline)
Exposure to posts in  
the Facebook feed;  
news sites visited
Endline survey  
  subsample
Endline survey,  
approximately two  
months after baseline
17,635 (47 percent of  
participants who completed 
the baseline survey)
Political opinions;  
affective polarization
Notes: This table describes the main sample and subsamples analyzed along with the data sources, the number 
of participants, and the main outcomes. The subsamples and data are described in Section IIC. The outcomes are 
described in Section IID.


--- PAGE 11 ---
841
LEVY: SOCIAL MEDIA, NEWS CONSUMPTION, AND POLARIZATION
VOL. 111 NO. 3
The extension data were only collected when participants used a computer while 
being signed into their Chrome account. In practice, individuals often use Facebook 
and browse news sites on a mobile device or at work, where they may use a different 
browser. Therefore, the estimates for the number of posts participants were exposed 
to in their feed and the number of sites they visited are lower bounds.12
Additional details on the survey, Facebook, and extension data can be found in 
online Appendix Sections A.1, A.2, and A.3, respectively.
Subsamples: The datasets define three separate subsamples. To maximize power, 
when analyzing the effects on opinions and attitudes, I focus on the endline survey 
subsample and when analyzing media outcomes, I focus on the extension subsam-
ple and the access posts subsample (or their overlap). Online Appendix Table A.2 
presents descriptive statistics on the subsamples and shows that the extension sub-
sample is more liberal and older, as would be expected when excluding partici-
pants who took the survey on a smartphone. The share of compliers is greater in 
the extension subsample, which assists in detecting treatment effects despite the 
smaller sample size.
External Data.—
Outlets: I measure the slant of news at the outlet level, the common method 
used in the literature. I determine an outlet’s slant according to a dataset by Bakshy, 
Messing, and Adamic (2015) defining the slant of 500 news domains based on 
the ­self-reported ideology of Facebook users sharing articles from the domains. 
Using this definition, a completely liberal outlet has a slant of approximately –1, a 
­middle-of-the-road outlet has a slant of approximately 0, and a completely conser-
vative outlet has a slant of approximately 1. I use this measure of slant since it is 
based on 2014 data, and thus more recent than other common measures, and since it 
covers a large number of online news outlets. The dataset correlates well with other 
measures of slant (e.g., Gentzkow and Shapiro 2010). I refer to outlets in this dataset 
as leading news outlets. I exclude from the dataset several popular domains which 
are clearly not news outlets or that serve mostly as portals, and merge several outlets 
that are associated with multiple domains. I manually determine the Facebook pages 
of leading outlets by searching for pages with names similar to each outlet’s domain. 
Facebook pages were found for 370 outlets.
Comscore Browsing Data: To provide descriptive statistics on news consumption 
outside the experimental sample, I analyze the 2017 and 2018 Comscore WRDS 
Web Behavior Database Panel (Comscore 2018). Each observation in the dataset 
is a domain visited by a specific computer along with the referral domain. I merge 
this dataset with the list of leading news outlets. The Comscore data provide sev-
eral advantages. The combined 2017 and 2018 samples include 94,342 individuals 
12 In the baseline survey, participants were asked how many links to articles about government and politics 
they clicked on Facebook in the past 24 hours using a computer and on a mobile phone. Among participants in the 
extension subsample who provided a numerical answer under 1,000, approximately 72 percent of news links were 
clicked on a computer, so it is likely that most, but not all data are collected for these participants.


--- PAGE 12 ---
842
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2021
who visited at least one news site. Previous studies have shown that the panel is 
representative of online buyers in the United States (De los Santos, Hortaçsu, and
Wildenbeest 2012). Finally, the data have been collected for previous years and
used by other researchers (Gentzkow and Shapiro 2011), allowing me to estimate
changes in news consumption over time. I classify the channels through which visi-
tors reached websites as social, search, or direct visits. Facebook is by far the dom-
inant referral source in the social category.
For more details on the outlet and Comscore datasets, see online Appendix 
Sections A.4 and A.5, respectively.
D. Outcomes
Media.—I measure subscriptions to outlets on Facebook, exposure to news in 
the Facebook feed, news sites visited, and posts shared, using the following out-
come measures. First, I estimate the direct effect of the experiment according to 
the number of times participants engaged with the potential outlets (the four liberal
outlets and the four conservative outlets defined for each participant). For example,
I measure the number of posts that participants observed from their potential lib-
eral and conservative outlets in their feed. Second, I measure the mean slant of all 
leading news outlets with which participants engaged. Third, to measure the effects 
of the pro- and ­counter-attitudinal treatments on total news consumption, I define 
a congruence scale, calculated as the mean slant of news consumed, multiplied by 
(−1) for liberal participants. This scale has a higher value when individuals con-
sume more extreme news matching their ideology. Fourth, I measure the share of 
­counter-attitudinal news, defined as the share of news from ­counter-attitudinal out-
lets among all news from pro- and ­counter-attitudinal outlets.13
Opinions and Attitudes.—I analyze the effects of news exposure on two primary 
outcomes: political opinions and affective polarization. For both outcomes, an index 
is composed by taking an average of all the valid ­non-missing index components 
and then standardized by subtracting the control group mean and dividing by the 
control group’s standard deviation.
The political opinions index is composed of 20 survey questions focusing on 
domestic political issues and political figures covered in the news during the study 
period, such as new tariffs, the March For Our Lives Movement, and the investi-
gation regarding Russian interference in the elections. Each outcome variable is 
defined such that a higher value is associated with a more conservative opinion and 
then standardized.
The affective polarization index is composed of five outcomes. First, I use 
the feeling thermometer questions ( feeling thermometer). Second, participants
were asked how well the following statement describes them on a scale from 1 
to 5: “I find it difficult to see things from Democrats’/Republicans’ point of
view” (difficult perspective). Third, participants were asked a similar question
on the following statement: “I think it is important to consider the perspective of  
13 Counter-attitudinal outlets are defined as outlets in the two most liberal quintiles for conservatives or the 
two most conservative quintiles for liberals. For more details on the definitions, see online Appendix Section B.1.


--- PAGE 13 ---
843
LEVY: SOCIAL MEDIA, NEWS CONSUMPTION, AND POLARIZATION
VOL. 111 NO. 3
Democrats/Republicans” (consider perspective).14 Fourth, participants were asked
if they think the Democratic and Republican parties have a lot (3), some (2), a
few (1), or almost no good ideas (0) ( party ideas). For each of the four previous
measures, I calculate the difference between attitudes toward the party associated 
with the participant’s ideological leaning and attitudes toward the opposing party, a 
typical measure of affective polarization. Fifth, participants are asked if they would 
feel very upset (2), somewhat upset (1), or not upset at all (0) if they had a son or
daughter who married someone from the opposing party (marry opposing party).15
Each outcome variable is defined such that a higher value is associated with more 
polarization and then standardized.
E. Empirical Strategy
When estimating the effects of the intervention on engagement with the liberal 
and conservative outlets, the slant of news with which participants engaged, and their 
political opinions, I compare the liberal and conservative treatments. When measur-
ing the effects on polarization and engagement with pro- and ­counter-attitudinal 
outlets, it no longer makes sense to use these treatments (a conservative treatment
is not expected to make participants more or less polarized than a liberal treatment),
and therefore I focus on the pro- and ­counter-attitudinal treatments. This strategy 
follows the study’s ­pre-analysis plan, discussed in online Appendix Section B.2.
Liberal and Conservative Treatments: I estimate the following ITT regression:
(1)
	​​Y​i​  =  ​β​1​ ​T​ i​ L​ + ​β​2​ ​T​ i​ C​ + α ​X​i​ + ​ε​i​​,
where ​​T​ i​ L​, ​T​ i​ C​  ∈  ​{0, 1}​​ is whether participant ​i​ is assigned to the liberal or conser-
vative treatment, respectively. When estimating the effect on political opinions, I 
focus on the difference between the liberal and conservative treatments, by testing 
whether ​​β​1​  <  ​β​2​​ (i.e., the conservative treatment made participants more conser-
vative, compared to the effect of the liberal treatment). To increase power, I con-
trol for the following set of covariates, ​X​: ­self-reported ideology, party affiliation, 
approval of President Trump, ideological leaning, age, age squared, gender, and 
baseline questions measuring political opinions that are similar to questions used 
in the endline survey. Online Appendix Section B.3 describes the control variables. 
When estimating the effect on media outcomes, I only control for the outcomes in 
14 Both statements are based on an empathy index developed by Robb Willer, Jamil Zaki, and Emily Reit, 
loosely based on the Interpersonal Reactivity Index (Davis 1980).
15 Participants stating in the endline survey that they are Republicans or Democrats were asked how they would 
feel if they had a son or daughter who married a Democrat or Republican, respectively. Participants who did not 
identify with either party were asked about one of the parties randomly. I asked participants only about the opposing 
party since I was concerned they would find it odd to state how upset they would be if they had a son or daughter 
who married someone from their own party. However, conditioning the question on an endline variable could poten-
tially bias the result. For example, if some participants were affected by the ­counter-attitudinal treatment, and as 
a result, no longer identified with their party, they were less likely to be asked about the opposing party in endline 
and the average participant asked about the opposing party would be slightly less moderate in this treatment arm. 
I include this measure in the affective polarization index since it is the only ­social-distance measure in the index, 
it is included in the ­pre-analysis plan, and any bias is expected to go against the direction of my findings. Online 
Appendix Table A.13 shows that the results are robust to excluding this measure from the index.


--- PAGE 14 ---
844
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2021
baseline, when they exist. All regressions use robust standard errors unless noted 
otherwise.
­Pro-Attitudinal and ­Counter-Attitudinal Treatments: I estimate the following 
ITT regression:
(2)
	​​Y​i​​  =  ​β​1​ ​T​ i​ A​ + ​β​2​ ​T​ i​ P​ + α ​X​i​ + ​ε​i​​ ,
where ​​T​ A​  ∈  ​{0, 1}​​ is whether the participant was assigned to the ­counter-attitudinal
treatment, defined as a liberal treatment assigned to a conservative participant or a 
conservative treatment assigned to a liberal participant. Similarly, ​​T​ P​  ∈  ​{0, 1}​​ is 
whether the participant was assigned to the ­pro-attitudinal treatment, defined as a 
liberal treatment assigned to a liberal participant or a conservative treatment assigned 
to a conservative participant. The term ​X​ is the same set of control variables used 
when analyzing the effect on political opinions, with baseline measures of political 
opinions replaced with baseline measures of affective polarization. Here, ​​β​1​  <  ​β​2​​ 
tests whether individuals become more polarized when assigned to ­pro-attitudinal 
news, compared to ­counter-attitudinal news.
I determine whether participants are liberal or conservative (their ideological
leaning) according to the party they identify with or lean toward. If participants do
not identify with either the Democratic or Republican Party, their ideological lean-
ing is defined according to their self reported ideology, and if they do not identify 
as liberal or conservative, it is defined according to the candidate they supported in 
the 2016 elections.16
F. Balance and Attrition
Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for participants in the baseline sample and 
shows that the sample is balanced. Online Appendix Table A.3 presents a balance 
table according to whether the treatment matched the participant’s ideology (pro- 
or ­counter-attitudinal), and shows that the sample is balanced along the redefined 
treatment arms as well. The sample size in this table is slightly smaller because it 
excludes participants for whom an ideological leaning cannot be defined.
Similar to other ­opt-in panels, the sample is not nationally representative. 
Participants tend to be more liberal than the US population and, as expected, more 
participants say that they get most of their news on social media (18 percent), com-
pared to the national population (13 percent). The share of female participants and
the average age is similar to the US population. ­Self-reported exposure to news on 
Facebook in line with one’s views is similar to US Facebook users. Overall, the sam-
ple seems at least as representative as samples of Mechanical Turk users (Berinsky,
Huber, and Lenz 2012).17
16 Approximately 3 percent of participants do not identify with the Republican or Democratic Party, do not 
­self-identify as liberals or conservatives, and did not support Trump or Clinton. They are excluded from the analy-
sis when analyzing the effect of the pro- and ­counter-attitudinal treatments. The effect on affective polarization is 
robust to including only participants who identify with or lean toward the Democratic or Republican Party.
17 One advantage of the sample is that Facebook users are not experienced, ­semi-professional survey takers. 
Participants were asked in the endline survey how many additional surveys they completed in the past month, the 


--- PAGE 15 ---
845
LEVY: SOCIAL MEDIA, NEWS CONSUMPTION, AND POLARIZATION
VOL. 111 NO. 3
Table 2 and online Appendix Table A.3 also test for differential attrition among 
the three subsamples. The access posts and extension subsamples have low attrition 
rates compared to baseline take-up (as shown in Table 1) and very small differences 
in attrition by treatment arm. Therefore, their results are unlikely to be affected by 
attrition.18 However, more participants completed the endline survey in the control 
median answer is 1 and the mean answer is 7. For comparison, a 2014 study found that the median Mechanical Turk 
worker reported participating in 20 academic studies in the week before the question was asked (Rand et al. 2014).
18 There is a very small, but statistically significant difference between the conservative treatment and the other 
groups in the number of participants who provided permissions to access their posts for two weeks following the 
Table 2—Balance Table, Liberal, and Conservative Treatments
Mean
Difference
Variable
Sample  
N = 37,494
United 
States
Facebook  
users
Control -  
Lib.
Control -  
Cons.
Cons. -  
Lib.
Baseline survey
Ideology (−3, 3)
−0.61
0.17
0.01
0.01
0.00
Democrat
0.38
0.35
0.30
0.01
0.00
0.01
Republican
0.17
0.28
0.21
−0.01
0.00
−0.01
Independent
0.37
0.32
0.35
−0.00
−0.00
−0.00
Vote support Clinton
0.53
−0.00
−0.00
−0.00
Vote support Trump
0.26
0.00
−0.00
0.01
Feeling therm., Rep.
29.07
43.06
0.11
0.25
−0.13
Feeling therm., Dem.
46.99
48.70
0.40
0.46
−0.06
Difficult pers., Rep. (1, 5)
3.13
0.02
0.00
0.02
Difficult pers., Dem. (1, 5)
2.39
−0.00
0.01
−0.01
Facebook echo chamber
1.18
1.12
−0.00
−0.00
0.00
Follows news
3.35
2.42
0.01
0.01
−0.00
Most news social media
0.18
0.13
−0.00
0.00
−0.00
Device
Took survey mobile
0.67
−0.01
−0.00
−0.01
Facebook
Female
0.52
0.52
0.55
−0.01
−0.00
−0.00
Age
47.69
47.30
42.86
0.22
−0.13
0.35
Total subscriptions
474
5.15
9.04
−3.89
News outlets slant (−1, 1)
−0.18
0.00
0.00
0.00
Access posts, pre-treat.
0.98
0.00
0.01
−0.00
Attrition
Took followup survey
0.47
0.03
0.03
−0.00
Access posts, 2 weeks
0.92
0.00
0.01
−0.01
Extension install, 2 weeks
0.05
0.00
−0.00
0.00
F-test
1.20
0.89
1.05
P-value
[0.21]
[0.64]
[0.39]
Notes: This table presents descriptive statistics, along with the difference between participants assigned to each 
treatment arm. Vote support is the share of participants who voted for or preferred the candidate. Difficult pers. 
is whether participants find it difficult to see things from Democrats’/Republicans’ point of view. Facebook echo 
chamber is whether the opinions participants see about government and politics on Facebook are in line with their 
views always or nearly all the time (3), most of the time (2), some of the time (1), or not too often (0). Follows news 
is whether participants follow government and politics always (4), most of the time (3), about one-half of the time 
(2), some of the time (1), or never (0). Total subscriptions is the number of Facebook pages participants subscribed 
to in baseline. News outlets slant is the slant of news outlets subscriptions. F-tests are calculated by regressing the 
treatment on the pre-treatment variables, with missing values replaced with a constant and an indicator for a missing 
value. Data sources for the United States and Facebook population are specified in online Appendix Section C.4.1.


--- PAGE 16 ---
846
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2021
group (49 percent), compared to the liberal (46 percent) and conservative (46 per-
cent) treatment arms. The differential attrition mostly stems from a small share of
participants in the conservative and liberal treatments who did not complete the final 
screen of the baseline survey after they encountered the intervention.
Online Appendix Tables A.4 and A.5 present balance tables for the endline survey 
subsample and show that despite the attrition, the two treatment arms and control 
group are similar on observables. Participants in the ­pro-attitudinal treatment who 
completed the endline survey are not substantially more polarized in baseline than 
participants in the ­counter-attitudinal treatment. Moreover, there is no differential 
attrition between the conservative and liberal treatments and no differential attrition 
between the pro- and ­counter-attitudinal treatments. When estimating the effect on 
the primary endline survey outcomes, I compare the two treatment arms to each 
other to mitigate concerns over differential attrition. Still, it is possible that attrition 
could affect the results.
G. Compliance
Throughout the analysis, I focus on ITT estimates. To measure the effect of com-
plying with the treatment, defined as subscribing to at least one offered outlet, I also 
analyze TOT estimators by regressing the dependent variable on compliance with 
each treatment and instrumenting compliance with the random treatment assign-
ment. Since the intervention only offers new outlets to participants, defiers do not 
exist in this experiment.19 Because compliance is defined as liking an outlet when 
it was offered, ­always-takers do not exist either.20 If compliers are more likely to 
engage with the outlets and be affected by them, perhaps because they are more 
interested in the content, the TOT is expected to be larger than the average treatment 
effect.
In the entire baseline sample, 59 percent of participants who were offered 
­pro-attitudinal outlets complied with the ­pro-attitudinal treatment and subscribed to 
at least one outlet, compared to 48 percent of participants offered ­counter-attitudinal 
outlets. Table 3 shows that participants were more likely to subscribe to outlets they 
are familiar with, to outlets with a perceived ideology similar to their own ideology, 
and to outlets they perceive as more moderate. Online Appendix Table A.6 presents 
descriptive statistics on the compliers by treatment arm and shows that liberals, 
women, and participants who subscribe to more outlets on Facebook were more 
intervention. However, this minimal difference seems to be random since a small statistically significant difference 
between the groups in providing permissions already existed before the intervention.
19 Defying the experiment would mean unsubscribing from an offered outlet, but participants are only offered 
outlets to which they are not already subscribed. There are rare cases where I only observe a partial list of outlets in 
baseline and as a result, a participant could have been offered an outlet she already subscribed to and “unliked” the 
outlet’s page instead of “liking” it. However, I estimate that I observed a partial list of outlets for less than 1 percent 
of participants and I do not have evidence that participants unsubscribed from outlets as a result of the intervention.
20 In a handful of cases, participants subscribed to potential outlets even when the outlets were not offered, pos-
sibly since the survey included questions about these outlets. However, these cases are extremely rare and therefore, 
I am not defining them as compliance for simplicity. When focusing on the two weeks following the intervention 
instead of immediate compliance, an ­always-taker would be defined as a participant who would subscribe to a 
potential outlet in that period, regardless of the intervention. In the control group, only 0.2 percent and 0.5 percent 
of participants subscribed to a potential conservative or liberal outlet, respectively, in the two weeks following the 
intervention.


--- PAGE 17 ---
847
LEVY: SOCIAL MEDIA, NEWS CONSUMPTION, AND POLARIZATION
VOL. 111 NO. 3
likely to comply with both treatments. To test whether participants open to new 
ideas comply more often with the treatments, I use two questions from a brief mea-
sure of the big five personality traits (Gosling, Rentfrow, and Swann 2003), along 
with ­self-reported certainty in political opinions, and exposure to ­counter-attitudinal 
news in baseline. Based on these measures, compliers with the ­counter-attitudinal 
treatment are slightly more open than ­non-compliers, but the differences are not 
large (0.­12–0.19 standard deviations) and some of these differences exist to a lesser 
degree when comparing compliers and ­non-compliers among participants assigned 
to the ­pro-attitudinal treatment.
This section deals with immediate compliance with the intervention, which is 
especially useful when interpreting the TOT effects. However, the experiment is 
designed to allow participants to ­opt-out of news content at any stage. They could 
always unsubscribe from the offered outlets or ignore posts from the outlets appear-
ing in their feed. Therefore, the effects found will probably be driven by participants 
who decide to consume the content offered when it becomes accessible. This feature 
increases the external validity of the results because these participants are often the 
­policy-relevant population, as they are more likely to engage with the offered outlets 
in other circumstances as well.
Table 3—Compliance with the Treatments
(1)
(2)
Conservative treatment, conservative ideology
0.513
(0.008)
Liberal treatment, conservative ideology
0.349
(0.008)
Conservative treatment, liberal ideology
0.541
(0.006)
Liberal treatment, liberal ideology
0.623
(0.006)
Know slant
0.230
(0.006)
Outlet ideology, absolute value (standard deviation)
−0.047
(0.003)
Ideological distance (standard deviation)
−0.083
(0.002)
Controls
X
X
Observation unit
Ind.
Ind. × outlet offered
Observations
36,728
97,937
Notes: This table estimates the association between participants’ characteristics and compli-
ance with each treatment arm. In column 1, the dependent variable is whether the participant 
subscribed to at least one offered outlet and the independent variable is the interaction of par-
ticipant’s ideological leaning and her treatment assignment. The reference group is the control 
group where there are no compliers. In column 2, the data is pooled such that each observation 
is a participant and an outlet offered. The dependent variable is whether the participant sub-
scribed to the outlet. The independent variables are based on the outlet’s perceived ideology 
according to the participant, where ideology is measured on a 7-point scale from extremely lib-
eral to extremely conservative with an additional option of “do not know.” Ideological distance 
is the standardized difference between the participant’s self-reported ideology and the outlet’s 
perceived ideology. Both regressions control for age, age squared, gender, and the set of poten-
tial outlets defined for a participant, and column 2 also controls for outlet fixed effects. Column 
1 use robust standard errors and column 2 clusters standard errors at the individual level.


--- PAGE 18 ---
848
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2021
III.  Descriptive Analysis: Segregation in Online News Consumption
Is the rise of social media associated with a change in news consumption pat-
terns? In this section, I present descriptive statistics on segregation in social media 
and online news. I calculate two main measures: isolation and segregation.
Isolation measures whether conservatives and liberals visit different websites. 
It is defined as the difference between exposure to conservatives in websites vis-
ited by conservatives and exposure to conservatives in websites visited by liberals. 
Exposure to conservatives is the share of conservatives visiting each set of websites. 
Intuitively, if conservatives tend to visit websites visited by many other conserva-
tives, while liberals tend to visit websites visited by few conservatives, the isolation 
measure is higher. To make the measure comparable to estimates by Gentzkow and 
Shapiro (2011), I aggregate visits at the daily level and use the adjusted ­leave-out
estimator of isolation.
Segregation is defined as the scaled standard deviation of the slant of news sites 
visited by participants. To keep this measure in the unit interval, the slant of outlets 
is normalized to range from 0 to 1. A higher value means that there is a greater dif-
ference in the slant of news consumed by two random individuals. The measures are 
formally defined in online Appendix Section B.1.
A. Segregation in Online News
I find that news consumed through social media is more segregated and extreme 
than news consumed through other channels. Figure 3 shows that in the ­2017–2018 
Comscore sample, the segregation index is 0.18 for news sites visited through search 
engines, 0.21 for news sites visited directly, and 0.28 for news sites visited through 
social media. I cannot precisely calculate the isolation measure for the Comscore 
panel since individual ideology is not observed. Instead, in panel B of Figure 4, 
I analyze isolation based on the extension subsample and show that isolation is 
greater in news sites visited through Facebook, compared to news sites visited 
through other means. The analysis is based on participants assigned to the control 
group and includes data from the first eight weeks after the extension was installed. 
The full results are presented in online Appendix Table A.7, which also shows that 
total segregation is similar in the extension and Comscore datasets.
The increased segregation for news sites visited through social media could stem 
from the composition of the individuals using social media to consume news. Online 
Appendix Table A.8a presents the segregation among the 8,882 individuals in the 
Comscore sample who visited multiple news sites through Facebook and through 
other sources. As all the individuals in this group consume news through both chan-
nels, the comparison better isolates the effect of the medium. While the share of news 
sites visited through Facebook is much greater among these individuals (26 percent),
sites visited through Facebook remain substantially more segregated than sites visited 
through other means.
Panel A of Figure 5 presents the distribution of the mean slant of news consump-
tion for these individuals and shows that news sites visited through Facebook are 
more extreme. When visiting news sites through Facebook, 57 percent of individu-
als consume news that is on average more conservative than the Wall Street Journal 


--- PAGE 19 ---
849
LEVY: SOCIAL MEDIA, NEWS CONSUMPTION, AND POLARIZATION
VOL. 111 NO. 3
or more liberal than the Washington Post, and when visiting news sites through other 
sources, 39 percent of individuals consume such partisan news.21
Panel B of Figure 5 shows a clear correlation between the consumers’ ideology 
and the slant of their news consumption. I proxy for ideology using the share of dona-
tions to Republican candidates in the consumers’ zip codes in the 2016 and 2018 
election cycles, based on FEC data. The slope for news consumed through Facebook 
is steeper than the slope for news consumed through other sources, indicating that 
sites visited through Facebook tend to better match the consumers’ ideology.
Has segregation in online news consumption increased? In the extension sam-
ple, the segregation index for all online news is 0.20 when I define the slant of 
outlets based on Bakshy, Messing, and Adamic (2015) and 0.23 when I define the 
slant based on the ideological leaning of participants (Peterson, Sharad, and Iyengar 
2019). These segregation levels are similar to a value of 0.25 found by Peterson, 
Sharad, and Iyengar (2019) using 2016 data from the Wakoopa toolbar and substan-
tially larger than a value of 0.11 found by Flaxman, Sharad, and Rao (2016) using 
2013 Bing toolbar data. To compare the isolation index to previous estimates, I use 
­visit-level measures of isolation (row 6 in online Appendix Table A.9b), which give 
more weight to individuals who visit more news sites. The isolation of browsing 
behavior in the extension sample is 0.22, similar to a value of 0.­21–0.24 calculated 
by Peterson, Sharad, and Iyengar (2019) and larger than a value of 0.­07–0.08 calcu-
lated by Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011). One limitation with this comparison is that 
while I attempt to make the samples comparable, each study still analyzes the data 
slightly differently. In online Appendix Table A.8b, I provide a cleaner comparison 
21 Washington Post and the Wall Street Journal are in the thirty-sixth and sixty-third percentile of the Bakshy, 
Messing, and Adamic (2015) dataset. When using the twenty-fifth and seventy-fifth percentile, which are similar 
to the Boston Globe and Fox News, 19 percent of individuals consume news that is on average more extreme than 
those outlets when visiting news sites through Facebook and 5 percent consume such extreme news when visiting 
news sites through other sources.
Figure 3. Segregation in News Sites Visited by Referral Source, Comscore Data
Notes: This figure displays the segregation in news sites visited by referral source. The definition of the segregation 
measure is discussed in Section III. Online Appendix Section A.5 defines the websites composing each channel.
 ­ 
Source: 2017–2018 Comscore data
Search
Not Facebook
0
0.1
0.2
Referral source
Segregation
Facebook
Other
Social
Direct


--- PAGE 20 ---
850
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2021
of segregation levels by comparing ­2007–2008 and ­2017–2018 Comscore data and 
do not find substantial changes in segregation.
The analysis does not lead to conclusive results regarding changes in news con-
sumption. Segregation online may have increased, but it probably did not change 
dramatically. How does this result coincide with increased segregation on social 
media? While I find that Facebook is more segregated than other online content, 
and while Facebook is typically the first or second most important source for online 
traffic, social media still accounts for a limited share of visits to news sites. For an 
average individual in the Comscore sample, 4 percent of news sites were visited 
through Facebook and in the extension subsample, which only includes Facebook 
users, the figure is 15 percent.22 Therefore, social media can be substantially more 
segregated than news consumed through other sources without dramatically chang-
ing overall segregation in online news consumption.
22 These estimates may underestimate Facebook usage since they rely on browsing activity on computers, while 
Facebook is more popular on mobile. For comparison, Parse.ly (2018) tracks pages viewed in thousands of sites and 
estimates that 16 percent of traffic related to Donald Trump in ­April to May 2018 was from social media and that 
Facebook is the largest external referral source for traffic in the law, government, and politics category.
Figure 4. Isolation by Medium, Extension Data
Notes: This figure displays the isolation of news participants engaged with. A higher value means liberals and con-
servatives were more likely to engage with different news outlets. Panel A shows the isolation measure for news 
sites participants visited, posts that appeared in their feed, posts they shared, and news outlets they subscribed to 
on Facebook. Panel B compares isolation values for news sites visited through different sources. Panel C compares 
different types of posts in the Facebook feed. The figure analyzes data from control group participants in the first 
eight weeks after the extension was installed.
Panel A. Isolation
Panel B. Isolation by
browsing referral source
Panel C. Isolation within
Facebook feed
Browsing
Facebook feed
Posts shared
Subscribed pages
Not through Facebook
Through Facebook, posts by friends
Through Facebook, all posts
Through Facebook, posts by pages
Posts by friends
Sponsored posts
Posts by pages
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Isolation


--- PAGE 21 ---
851
LEVY: SOCIAL MEDIA, NEWS CONSUMPTION, AND POLARIZATION
VOL. 111 NO. 3
B. Segregation within Facebook
Why does news consumed through Facebook tend to be more extreme and seg-
regated? Two mechanisms that could increase segregation are homophily in social 
networks (an “echo chamber” effect where one’s friends tend to recommend
­like-minded news sources) and the abundance of accessible, free media options
allowing consumers to personalize their news feed. Panels B and C of Figure 4 
show that the increased segregation is mostly associated with Facebook pages (the
outlets participants subscribe to on Facebook) and not with Facebook friends (the
Figure 5. News Consumption in the Comscore Panel
Notes: ­Panel A presents the distribution of the mean slant of news sites visited (smoothing bandwidth = 0.05). 
Major news outlets are added to the ­x-axis for reference. The slant of each domain is based on Bakshy, Messing, 
and Adamic (2015). A visit is referred from Facebook if the referring domain is “facebook.com.” ­Panel B presents
a binned scatter plot. The ­x-axis is the share of Republican donations in a zip code based on FEC donation data for 
the 2016 and 2018 election cycles and the ­y-axis is the mean slant of news sites visited. The sample for both figures 
includes individuals in the 2017 and 2018 Comscore Web Behavior Database Panel who visited news sites multiple 
times through Facebook and through other sources.
Panel A. Distribution of mean news slant
Boston Globe
Breitbart
Fox News
HuffPost
Yahoo News
NYT
Salon
USA Today
Washington Post
WSJ
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
−0.5
0
0.5
1
Slant
Density
Facebook references
Other news
All online news
Panel B. Ideology and slant of news consumption
−0.6
−0.3
0
0.3
0.6
Republican donations share
Mean news slant, std. dev.
(higher = more conservative)
Facebook references
Other news
All online news
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1


--- PAGE 22 ---
852
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2021
social network). The isolation index is 0.14 when participants visit news sites not
through Facebook, 0.18 when they visit sites through posts shared by Facebook 
friends, and 0.43 when they visit sites through posts shared by Facebook pages. 
Online Appendix Table A.7b shows that the results hold for the segregation measure 
as well.23
This descriptive analysis cannot completely isolate each mechanism, nor rule out 
additional mechanisms. For example, posts by both Facebook friends and Facebook 
pages are also affected by Facebook’s algorithm, which is discussed in more detail 
in Section VI. Still, the analysis suggests that in order to understand segregation in 
social media, it is important to study the forces determining which pages appear 
in the Facebook feed and the effect of posts from these pages. Furthermore, posts 
shared by pages should not be ignored since approximately one-half of visits to 
news sites through Facebook in the extension subsample are through links shared by 
pages (row 10 in online Appendix Table A.9b).
To conclude, in a 2019 survey, 83 percent of Americans stated that ­one-sided 
news is a very big or moderately big problem on social media.24 This section pro-
vides evidence that this concern is warranted, as it shows that news accessed through 
Facebook is indeed more segregated and extreme than other online news. The next 
section estimates the causal effects of exposure to more and less segregated news 
using the random variation generated by the experiment.
IV.  Findings: Demand for News on Social Media
A. Individuals Are Willing to Engage with ­Counter-Attitudinal News
Figure 6 displays the effects of the pro- and ­counter-attitudinal treatments on 
engagement with the potential pro- and ­counter-attitudinal outlets, respectively. To 
keep the results comparable across media outcomes, the figure is calculated for the 
participants who both installed the browser extension and provided permissions to 
access their posts for at least two weeks. Each row in the figure is estimated by 
regressing engagement with the four potential pro- or ­counter-attitudinal outlets in 
the two weeks following the intervention on the pro- or ­counter-attitudinal treat-
ment. The control group is the reference group. Throughout the analysis, I use linear 
regressions for ease of interpretation. Online Appendix Table A.10 shows that the 
effects on the feed, browsing behavior, and posts shared are qualitatively similar 
when running Poisson regressions.
The first panel of Figure 6 shows that the ­counter-attitudinal treatment increased 
the number of subscriptions to ­counter-attitudinal outlets by 1.42, compared to the 
control group. The effect is significant as the entire confidence interval is greater 
than zero. The increase is similar to the number of outlets participants immediately 
subscribed to in the intervention (1.51, not shown in the figure) since few partici-
pants unsubscribed from these outlets within two weeks.
23 Figure 4 also provides a comparison of the isolation index in outlets individuals subscribe to on Facebook, 
posts they see in their feed, news sites they visit, and posts they share (panel A), and shows that isolation is highest 
among subscriptions.
24 Pew Research Center American Trends Panel Wave 51, July 2019.


--- PAGE 23 ---
853
LEVY: SOCIAL MEDIA, NEWS CONSUMPTION, AND POLARIZATION
VOL. 111 NO. 3
Exposure to Posts in the Facebook Feed: The second panel of Figure 6 shows 
that in the two weeks following the intervention, participants in the pro- and 
­counter-attitudinal treatments were exposed to 64 and 31 additional posts from the 
potential pro- and ­counter-attitudinal outlets, respectively. For comparison, control 
group participants were exposed to 266 posts from leading news outlets, and 2,335 
posts in total, suggesting that the intervention affected news exposure but did not 
take over the participants’ feeds.
Online Appendix Figure A.2 shows that the effect on exposure is driven mostly 
by organic posts published by pages and not by sponsored posts or posts shared 
by friends, meaning that participants were exposed to the content directly, with-
out commentary from their social network. To test whether participants noticed the 
Figure 6. Effects of the Pro- and ­Counter-Attitudinal Treatments on Subscriptions, News Exposure, 
News Sites Visited, and Sharing Behavior, Two Weeks Following the Intervention
Notes: This figure shows the effect of the treatments on engagement with the offered outlets in the two weeks fol-
lowing the intervention. The dependent variable is engagement with either the four potential ­pro-attitudinal outlets 
or the four potential ­counter-attitudinal outlets and the independent variable is the treatment. Each panel presents 
the effect of a separate outcome. For example, in the third panel, the triangle point and dashed line present the point 
estimate and the confidence interval of the effect of the ­pro-attitudinal treatment on visits to the websites of the 
potential ­pro-attitudinal outlets, compared to the control group. The regressions control for the outcome measure in 
baseline if it exists. The sample includes 1,648 participants with a liberal or conservative ideological leaning who 
installed the extension and provided permissions to access their posts for at least two weeks. Error bars reflect 90 
percent confidence intervals.
Sharing behavior, posts shared (control mean in parentheses)
Browsing behavior, visits to news sites (control mean in parentheses)
Facebook exposure, posts in feed (control mean in parentheses)
Subscriptions, number of outlets
Counter-Att. outlets
Pro-Att. outlets
Counter-Att. posts (2.82)
Pro-Att. posts (22.61)
Counter-Att. sites (1.7)
Pro-Att. sites (13.21)
Counter-Att. posts (0.11)
Pro-Att. posts (0.84)
Pro−Att. treatment
Counter−Att. treatment
5
4
4.5
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
0
1
−0.5
−1
−1.5
0.5
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
−20
−40
−60
−2
−0.4 −0.3 −0.2 −0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
160
140


--- PAGE 24 ---
854
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
MARCH 2021
posts, they were asked in the endline survey how often they saw news from various 
outlets in their Facebook feed in the past week. Online Appendix Figures A.3 and 
A.4 show that participants reported seeing more news from the outlets they were 
offered and that participants in the ­counter-attitudinal treatment were less likely to 
say that opinions they see in their feed are aligned with their views. This implies that 
the effect on the feed was noticeable for at least two months, and confirms that the 
treatment affected the large subsample of participants who completed the endline 
survey and not only participants who installed the extension.
News Sites Visited: The third panel of Figure 6 shows that the ­counter-attitudinal 
treatment increased total visits to the websites of the ­counter-attitudinal outlets by 
79 percent, an ITT effect of 1.34 visits over a baseline of 1.70 visits in the two weeks 
following the intervention. The ­pro-attitudinal treatment increased the number of 
visits to the websites of ­pro-attitudinal outlets by 21 percent, an ITT effect of 2.72 
visits over a baseline of 13.21.
Online Appendix Figure A.5 separately estimates the effects of the intervention 
on the number of visits to the outlets’ websites through a link appearing in the 
Facebook feed and on visits not directly associated with Facebook. While there is 
a strong and significant effect on visits through Facebook, there also seems to be 
an effect on other visits, albeit the latter result is not precisely estimated. It is pos-
sible that once participants read an article on the outlets’ websites, they followed 
links to other articles as well. Alternatively, when participants became more familiar 
with the new outlets, they may have started visiting those outlets even without a 
Facebook referral. Online Appendix Figure A.6 shows that participants were more 
likely to click posts appearing higher in the feed. This could occur both because 
participants are more curious when they just start scrolling their feed and because 
Facebook’s algorithm ranks posts according to expected interest. Interestingly, con-
ditional on the order of posts, participants were as likely to visit a link from an outlet 
they subscribed to as a result of the intervention, compared to other news outlets.
Sharing Behavior: The fourth panel of Figure 6 shows that participants not only 
consumed news from ­counter-attitudinal outlets when they appeared in their feeds, 
they also shared the posts. To increase power and verify that the effect is not limited 
to participants who installed the extension in online Appendix Figure A.7, I analyze 
this effect using the entire access posts subsample and show that both treatments had 
a significant effect on the number of posts shared by these participants. The fact that 
participants chose to share the posts suggests that they considered the posts important, 
and implies that participants expanded the treatments to their social network.
Complementing previous studies focusing on Twitter (Halberstam and Knight 
2016), participants were much more likely to share ­pro-attitudinal posts. However, 
the relative effect on sharing ­counter-attitudinal posts compared to the control group 
(an increase of 105 percent) is stronger than the relative effect of the ­pro-attitudinal 
treatment (53 percent). Participants may have shared posts while commenting nega-
tively on their content. The second panel of online Appendix Figure A.7 focuses on 
posts that were shared with no commentary by the participants and shows that even 
among these posts, the ­counter-attitudinal treatment had a significant effect on the 
number of posts shared.


--- PAGE 25 ---
855
LEVY: SOCIAL MEDIA, NEWS CONSUMPTION, AND POLARIZATION
VOL. 111 NO. 3
B. The Social Media Feed Strongly Affects Online News Consumption
The previous section  demonstrated that individuals engage with the potential 
outlets when they appear in their feed, suggesting that news is often consumed 
incidentally when it becomes more accessible. This raises the question of whether 
individuals adjust the rest of their news consumption such that the slant of their news 
diet will not change. For example, individuals randomly offered the New York Times 
may start consuming more articles from the outlet’s website, but consequently con-
sume less news from the Boston Globe, which offers a similar perspective. To test 
whether the treatment affected the mean slant of all news with which participants 
are engaged, I focus on the conservative and liberal treatments since there are clear 
predictions on how these treatments would affect the slant.
Exposure to Posts on Facebook: The first panel of Figure 7 shows that when par-
ticipants were randomly offered liberal or conservative outlets, their feed became 
substantially more liberal or conservative, respectively. The combined ITT effect 
of the liberal and conservative treatments equals 36 percent of the gap between 
the slant of the feed of liberals and conservatives in the control group, where slant 
is measured based on the leading news outlets dataset (participants who did not
visit any news sites are excluded). The corresponding TOT effect is 47 percent. The
change in slant provides a strong first stage, which is useful when analyzing the 
effect on political beliefs. It also allows me to test whether a change in the social 
media feed affects the slant of news sites visited or whether participants maintain a 
constant slant. The latter would suggest that participants ­re-optimize the sites they 
visit following an exogenous shock to their feed.
News Sites Visited: I find that individuals do not fully ­re-optimize their news con-
sumption to keep the slant of the news sites they visit constant. The second panel of 
Figure 7 shows that the treatments had a strong and significant effect on the slant of 
news sites visited by the participants. The combined effects of the liberal and con-
servative treatments equal 14–19 percent (­ITT-TOT) of the difference in the slant of
news sites visited by conservatives and liberals in the control group. Based on the 
Comscore panel, the TOT effect of the liberal treatment would shift the online news 
diet of an individual in Pennsylvania, a swing state, to a diet similar to an individual 
in New York, a blue state, and the TOT effect of the conservative treatment would 
shift the individual’s news consumption to a news diet similar to an individual in 
South Carolina, a red state.25 Online Appendix Table A.11 shows that the effect on 
slant is robust across various subsamples (e.g., when excluding participants who did
not complete the endline survey).
By combining the exposure and browsing data, I find that when the compliers’ 
news feed became one standard deviation more conservative, the slant of the news 
sites they visit became 0.31 standard deviations more conservative, and the slant of 
the subset of sites visited through Facebook became 0.71 standard deviations more 
25 I determined the mean news consumption of each individual in Comscore’s 2017 and 2018 panels based on 
visits to leading news outlets. Individuals who visited only one news site are excluded. The slant is then calculated 
at the state level for all panel members in the state.
